<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta name="generator" content="epub3xhtml 1.0"/>
<meta name="originator" content="HTML"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,height=1024"/>
<title>epub3xhtml output</title>
<style>
  html                    {color: #333; font-size: 18px; font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;
                          line-height: 1.7; text-align: justify;}
  body                    { margin: 2em; margin-top:60px; margin-top:8vh;}
  h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6  { text-align:center; clear:both; }
  pre                     { white-space: pre-wrap; }</style>
</head>

<body>
<div>

<h1><span><span> </span></span></h1>

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000001"><span><span>THE BHAGAVAD GITA</span></span></span></h1>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000002"><span>COMPILED FROM VARIOUS WRITERS,</span> 1895</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000003"><span>ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS.</span></span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000004">Of these there have been several.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000005">The first was made in
1785, by Sir Charles Wilkins, to which was prefixed an Introduction by Warren
Hastings.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000006">This forms the basis of the translation in this volume, but it has been carefully revised by comparing it with more recent translations.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000007">It has been taken from an edition edited by the Rev. J.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000008">Garrett in 1846, containing the Sanskrit, Canarese, and English in parallel columns, for a copy of which the compiler is indebted to Colonel Jacob, translator of the <i>Vedúnta Sára.</i></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000009">The next translation was made by Mr. J. C. Thompson in
1855, and published by Trübner.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000010">Mr. Kasinath Trimbak Telang, of Bombay, published an English translation in 1875.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000011">This, probably revised, was adopted in 1887 by Max Müller in the “Sacred Books of the East.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000012">The author, in the
Preface, gives the following account of the general principles followed in the translation:</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000013"><span>“My aim has been to make that translation as close and literal a rendering as possible of the Gitâ, as interpreted by the commentators Sankarâ kârya, Sridharasvâmin, and Madhusûdana Sarasvatî.</span></span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000014">Reference has also been frequently made to the commentary of Râmânugâkârya and also to that of Nîlakantha.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000015">In 1882, a translation was published by the Rev. John
Davies in Trübner's “Oriental Series.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000016">The translation is excellent, and there are numerous valuable notes.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000017">About 1888, a translation, with commentary by J. M. Chatterji, was published by Trübner.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000018">In 1895 a translation, professedly by Mrs. Besant, was published by the Theosophical Publishing Society.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000019">She acknowledges that her knowledge of Sanskrit is imperfect; but her translation has passed through the hands of Indian gentlemen whose names are given.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000020">Many of the technical terms are retained.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000021">Some of the renderings are happily expressed.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000022">There is a very free poetical translation by Sir Edwin
Arnold, entitled “<i>The Song Celestial.</i>” , <i></i></span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000023">The translations differ considerably with regard to particular verses.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000024">Indian commentators belonging to the Dwaita, Adwaita, and
Visishtadwaita Sects, try to make the poem express their own views.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000025">The main features of the work, however, are given, more or less correctly, in all of them.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000026"><span>THE BHAGAVAD GITA,</span></span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000027"><span>OR</span></span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000028"><span>THE DIVINE SONG.</span></span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000029">LECTURE 1</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000030">“THE
GRIEF OF ARJUNA.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000031">DARITARASHTRA <i>said.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000032">Tell me, O Sanjaya, what the people of my own party, and those of the Pandavas, who are assembled at Kurukshetra resolved for war, have been doing.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000033">SANJAYA <i>replied.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000034">Duryodhana having seen the army of the Pandavas drawn up for battle, went to his preceptor, and addressed him in the following words:</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000035">“Behold!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000036">O master,” said he, “the mighty army of the sons of Pandu drawn forth by thy pupil, the experienced son of Drupada.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000037">In it are heroes, such as Bhíma and Arjuna: there is Yuyudhána, and Viráta, and Drupada, and Drishtaketu, and Chekitána, and the valiant prince of Kási, and Purujit, and Kuntibhoja, and Saivya a mighty chief, and Yudhámanyu the bold, and the daring Uttamaujas; the son of Subadrá, and the sons of Drupadí, all of great cars.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000038">“Be acquainted also with the names of those of our party, who are the most distinguished.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000039">I will mention a few of those who are amongst my generals, by way of example.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000040">There is thyself, Bhíshma and Karna and Kripa conquering in battle, and Aswatthamán and Vikarna, and the son of Somadatta, with others in vast numbers who for my service have forsaken the love of life.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000041">They are all of them practised in the use of arms, and experienced in every mode of fight.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000042">Our innumerable forces are commanded by Bhíshma, and the inconsiderable army of our foes is led by Bhíma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000043">Let all the generals, according to their respective divisions, stand in their posts, and one and all resolve to support Bhíshma.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000044">The ancient chief and brother of the grandsire of the
Kurus, then, shouting with a voice like a roaring lion, blew his shell to raise the spirits of the Kuru chief; and instantly innumerable shells, and other warlike instruments, were struck up on all sides, so that the clangour was excessive.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000045">At this time Mádhava and Arjuna were standing in a splendid chariot, drawn by white horses.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000046">They also sounded their shells, which were of celestial form: the name of the one which was blown by Hrishikesha, was Pánchajanya and that of Dhananjaya was called Devadatta.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000047">Bhíma, of dreadful deeds, blew his capacious shell Paundra, and Yudhishtira, the royal son of Kuntí, sounded Anantavijaya.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000048">Nakula and Sahadeva blew their shells also; the one called Sughosha, the other
Manipushpaka.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000049">The prince of Kási of the mighty bow, Sakandin Drishtadyumna, Viráta, Sátyaki of invincible arm.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000050">Drupada and the sons of his royal daughter, Krishna, with the son of Subhadrá, and all the other chiefs and nobles, blew also their respective shells.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000051">So that their shrill-sounding voices pierced the hearts of the Kurus, and re-echoed with a dreadful noise from heaven to earth.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000052">In the meantime Arjuna, he whose ensign is an ape, perceiving that the sons of Dhritarashtra stood ready to begin the fight, and that the weapons began to fly abroad, having taken up his bow, [ <i>addressed
Krishna in the following words:</i> ]</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000053">“I pray thee, O Achyuta, cause my chariot to be driven and placed between the two armies, that I may behold who are the men that stand ready, anxious to commence the bloody fight; and with whom it is that I am to fight; and who they are that are here assembled to support the vindictive son of Dritarashtra in the battle.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000054">SANJAYA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000055">Krishna being thus addressed by Gudakesa, drove the chariot; and, having caused it to halt in the midst of the space in front of the two armies, bade Arjuna cast his eyes towards the ranks of the Kurus, and behold where stood the aged Bhísma, and Drona, with all the chief nobles of their party.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000056">He looked at both the armies, and beheld, on either side, none but grandsires, uncles, cousins, tutors, sons, and brothers, near relations or bosom friends.'</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000057">Then when he had gazed for a while and beheld such friends as these prepared for the fight, he was overcome by deepest pity, and uttered his sorrow in the following words:</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000058">ARJUNA <i>said.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000059">“Having beheld, O Krishna! my kindred thus standing anxious for the fight, my limbs fail me, my mouth is dried up, the hair standeth on end upon my body, and all my frame trembleth!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000060">Even Gándíva, my bow, falleth from my hand, and my skin burneth.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000061">I am not able to stand; for my mind, as it were, turneth round.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000062">Also, O Keshava, I behold inauspicious omens on all sides.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000063">When
I shall have destroyed my kindred, shall I longer look for happiness?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000064">I wish not for victory, Krishna, for dominion, or pleasure; for what is dominion, and the enjoyment of life, or even life itself, when those, for whom dominion, pleasure, and enjoyment were to be coveted, have abandoned life and fortune, and stand here in the field ready for the battle?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000065">Preceptors, fathers, sons as well as grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, as also (other) relatives!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000066">These I do not wish to kill though they kill (me); not even for the sovereignty of the three worlds, how much less then for this earth!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000067">Having killed the sons of Dritarashtra, what pleasure, O destroyer of
Madhu, can we enjoy?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000068">Should we destroy these felons we shall only incur sin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000069">It therefore behoveth us not to kill such near relations as these.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000070">How, O Krishna, can we be happy after killing our own relatives?</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000071">What if they, whose minds are depraved by the lust of power, see no sin in the extirpation of their race, no crime in the murder of their friends, is that a reason why we should not resolve to turn away from such a crime, we who abhor the sin of extirpating the kindred of our blood?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000072">In the destruction of a family, the eternal rites of families are destroyed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000073">By the destruction of rites, the tribe becometh impious.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000074">From the influence of impiety the females of a family grow vicious; and from women that are become vicious the confusion of castes arises.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000075">This confusion provideth hell both for those which are slain and those which survive; and their forefathers, being deprived of <i>pindas?</i> and water, fall (from heaven).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000076">By the crimes of those who murder their own relations, sore cause of contamination and birth of caste-confusion, the family virtue, and the virtue of a whole tribe is for ever done away; and we have been told, O Krishna, that the habitation of those mortals whose generation hath lost its virtue, shall be in hell.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000077">Woe is me! what a great crime are we prepared to commit!</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000078">Alas! that for the lust of the enjoyments of dominion we stand here ready to murder the kindred of our own blood!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000079">I would rather patiently suffer that the sons of Dritarashtra with their weapons in their hands, should come upon me, and, unopposed, kill me unarmed in the field.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000080">SANJAYA <i>said.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000081">Having spoken thus, Arjuna sat down in his chariot; and having put away his bow and arrows, his heart was overwhelmed with grief.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000082">LECTURE 2</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000083">“THE
SANKHYA-YOGA DOCTRINE.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000084">SANJAYA <i>said.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000085">Krishna beholding him thus overcome with pity, his eyes full of tears, and his heart oppressed with deep affliction, thus spoke:</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000086">KRISHNA <i>said.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000087">“Whence, O Arjuna, cometh unto thee, thus standing in the field of battle, this unworthy weakness, excluding from heaven, and causing disgrace?</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000088">Yield not thus to unmanliness, for it ill becometh one like thee.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000089">Cast off this base faint-heartedness, and stand up, O conqueror of foes.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000090">ARJUNA , <i>said.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000091">“How, O Krishna, shall I resolve to fight with my arrows in the field against such as Bhíshma and Drona, who, of all men, are most worthy of my respect?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000092">I would rather beg my bread about the world, than be the murderer of my preceptors, to whom such reverence is due.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000093">Should I destroy such friends as these, I should partake of possessions, wealth, and pleasures, polluted with their blood.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000094">We know not whether it would be better that we should defeat them, or they us; for those, whom having killed, I should not wish to live, are even the sons and people of Dritarashtra who are here drawn up before us.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000095">My compassionate nature is overcome by the dread of sin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000096">Tell me truly what may be best for me to do.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000097">I am thy disciple, wherefore instruct me in my duty, who am under thy tuition; for my understanding is confounded by the dictates of my duty.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000098">And I see nothing that may assuage the grief which drieth up my faculties, although I were to obtain a kingdom without a rival upon earth, or dominion over the gods.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000099">SANJAYA , <i>said.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000100">Arjuna having thus spoken to Krishna, and declared that he would not fight, was silent.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000101">Krishna, smiling, addressed the afflicted prince, standing in the midst of the two armies, in the following words:</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000102">KRISHNA , <i>said.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000103">Thou grievest for those who are unworthy to be lamented, but thou speakest words of wisdom.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000104">The wise neither grieve for the dead nor for the living.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000105">I myself never <i>was not,</i> nor thou, nor all the princes of the earth; nor shall we ever hereafter cease <i>to be</i>.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000106">As the soul in this body findeth infancy, youth, and old age; so, in some body, will it find the like.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000107">One who is confirmed in this belief, is not disturbed by anything that may come to pass.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000108">The contacts of the senses give heat and cold, pleasure and pain; which come and go, and are transient and inconstant.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000109">Bear them with patience, O son of Bhárata; for the wise man, whom these disturb not, and to whom pain and pleasure are the same, is fitted for immortality.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000110">A thing unreal hath no existence, whilst that which is real is a stranger to non-entity.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000111">By those who look into the principles of things, the design of each is seen.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000112">Learn that he by whom all things were formed is incorruptible, and that no one is able to effect the destruction of this thing which is imperishable.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000113">These bodies, which envelop the souls which inhabit them, which are eternal, incorruptible, and surpassing all conception, are declared to be perishable; wherefore, Arjuna, resolve to fight.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000114">The man who believeth that it is the soul which killeth, and he who thinketh that the soul may be destroyed, are both alike deceived; for it neither killeth, nor is it killed.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000115">It is not born, nor does it ever die, nor having existed before, does it exist no more; it is ancient, constant, and eternal, and is not to be destroyed in this its mortal frame.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000116">How can the man, who believeth that this thing is incorruptible eternal, inexhaustible, and without birth, think that he can either kill or cause it to be killed?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000117">As a man throweth away old garments, and putteth on new, even so the soul, having quitted its old mortal frames, entereth into others which are new.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000118">The weapon divideth it not, the fire burneth it not, the water corrupteth it not, the wind drieth it not; It is indivisible, inconsumable, incorruptible, and is not to be dried away: it is everlasting, all-pervading, stable, immovable, and eternal: it is invisible, inconceivable, and unalterable; therefore, believing it to be thus, thou shouldst not grieve.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000119">But whether thou believest it of eternal birth and duration, or that it dieth with the body, still thou hast no cause to lament it.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000120">Death is certain to one that is born, and to one that dieth birth is certain.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000121">Wherefore it doth not behove thee to grieve about that which is inevitable.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000122">The former state of beings is unknown; the middle state is evident, and their future state is not to be discovered.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000123">Why then shouldst thou trouble thyself about such things as these?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000124">Some regard the soul as a wonder, whilst some speak and others hear of it with astonishment; but no one knoweth it, although he may have heard it described.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000125">This spirit being never to be destroyed in the mortal frame which it inhabiteth, it is unworthy for thee to be troubled for all these mortals.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000126">Regarding, too, thy proper duty, thou oughtest not to falter, for there is nothing better for a Kshatriya than a lawful battle.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000127">Happy are the Kshatriyas who find such a battle freely offered to them as an open door to heaven.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000128">But, if thou wilt not perform the duty of thy calling, and fight out the field, thou wilt abandon thy duty and thy honor, and be guilty of sin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000129">Then men will proclaim thy eternal disgrace, and to a well-born man disgrace is worse than death.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000130">The generals of the armies will think that thy retirement from the field arose from fear, and thou wilt become despicable, even amongst those by whom thou wert wont to be respected.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000131">Thy enemies will speak of thee in words which are unworthy to be spoken, and depreciate thy courage and abilities: what can be more dreadful than this!</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000132">If thou art slain thou wilt obtain heaven; if thou art victorious thou wilt enjoy a world for thy reward; wherefore, son of Kuntí, arise and be determined for the battle.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000133">Make pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat, the same, and then prepare for battle; thus thou shalt not incur sin.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000134">The doctrine here declared to you is according to the
Sánkhya (system); hear now the Yoga (teaching).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000135">Possessed of this knowledge, thou wilt cast off the bonds of action.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000136">In this there is no waste of effort, nor any disappointment.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000137">Even a little of it delivereth one from great fear.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000138">For those who enter on this path, son of Kuru, there is but one state of mind; but many-branched and endless are the doctrines of the inconstant.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000139">Flowery speech is uttered by the unwise, who delight in the words of the Vedas, O son of
Prithá! saying, “There is nothing but this.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000140">Whose souls are full of desires, whose goal is heaven, offering birth as the fruit of works, and prescribing many varied ceremonies for the attainment of pleasure and power.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000141">The state of mind consisting in steady contemplation does not belong to those who are devoted to pleasures and power.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000142">The Vedas deal with the three <i>gunas;</i> be thou free from the three <i>gunas</i>, O Arjuna: be free from the pairs of opposites, ever fixed on truth: without anxious care, and self-possessed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000143">The knowing Brahman findeth as many uses in the whole Vedas collectively, as in a reservoir full flowing with water.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000144">Let the motive be in the deed and not in the fruit.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000145">Be not one whose motive for action is the hope of reward.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000146">Let not thy life be spent in inaction.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000147">Steadfast in devotion, perform thy duty, abandon all thought of the consequence, and make the event equal, whether it terminate in good or evil; for such an equality is called <i>yoga.</i> For work is far inferior to the devotion of the mind.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000148">Seek an asylum, then, in the mind; for the miserable and unhappy are so on account of the fruit of things.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000149">Men who are endued with true wisdom cast off both good or evil deeds.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000150">Therefore apply thyself to <i>yoga; yoga</i> is wisdom in action.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000151">Wise men, who have abandoned all thought of the fruit which is produced from their actions, are freed from the chains of birth, and go to the regions of eternal happiness.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000152">When thy mind shall have passed through the snares of delusion, thou wilt attain to a disdain of what has been revealed or will be revealed hereafter.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000153">When thy mind, bewildered by <i>Sruti,</i> shall stand unshaken fixed in contemplation (<i>Samádhí</i>)<i>,</i> thou shalt then attain to <i>yoga.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000154">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000155">What, O Krishna, is the mark of that wise and steady man who is fixed in contemplation?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000156">How may such a sage speak?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000157">Where may he dwell?</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000158">How may he act?</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000159">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000160">A man is said to be confirmed in wisdom, when he forsaketh every desire which entereth into his heart, and of himself is happy, and contented in himself.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000161">His mind is undisturbed in adversity, he is happy and contented in prosperity, and he is a stranger to anxiety, fear, and anger.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000162">Such a wise man is called a <i>muni.</i></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000163">The knowledge of that man is established, who in all things is without affection, and having received good or evil, neither rejoiceth at the one, nor is cast down by the other.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000164">His knowledge is confirmed, when, like the tortoise, he can draw in all his senses and restrain them from their wonted purposes.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000165">Objects of sense withdraw from an abstinent man; not so the taste (for them).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000166">But when he hath seen the Supreme, he loseth even that.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000167">The tumultuous senses hurry away by force the heart even of the wise man who striveth to restrain them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000168">When he hath subdued them all, he may rest in devotion, intent on me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000169">The man who hath his passions in subjection, is possessed of true wisdom.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000170">When a man meditateth on the objects of sense, attachment to them ariseth; desire springeth from attachment; desire from anger.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000171">From anger is produced folly; from folly a depravation of the memory; from the loss of memory the loss of reason; and from the loss of reason the loss of all!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000172">A man of a governable mind, enjoying the objects of his senses, with all his faculties rendered obedient to his will and freed from pride and malice, obtaineth happiness supreme.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000173">In this happiness is born to him an exemption from all his troubles, and his mind being thus at ease, wisdom presently floweth to him from all sides.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000174">The man who attendeth not to this, is without wisdom or the power of contemplation.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000175">The man who is incapable of thinking, hath no rest.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000176">What happiness can he enjoy who hath no rest?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000177">The heart, which followeth the dictates of the moving passions, carrieth away his reason, as the storm the ship in the raging ocean.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000178">The man therefore who can restrain all his passions from their inordinate desires, is endued with true wisdom.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000179">Such a one waketh when all other beings go to rest.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000180">The contemplative <i>muni</i> sleepeth when all other beings are awake.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000181">The man whose passions enter his heart as waters run into the unswelling passive ocean, obtaineth happiness; not he who cherisheth desires.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000182">The man who, having abandoned all lusts of the flesh, walketh without inordinate desires, unassuming, and free from pride, obtaineth happiness.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000183">This is the Brahmic state; attaining to this, one is never deluded; and remaining in it till the hour of death, one passes on to absorption (<i>nirvána</i>) in Brahma.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000184">LECTURE 3</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000185">“THE
YOGA OF ACTION.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000186">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000187">If, according to thy opinion, knowledge be superior to action, why, then, dost thou urge me to engage in an undertaking so dreadful as this?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000188">Thou, as it were, confoundest my reason with a mixture of sentiments: wherefore choose one amongst them, by which I may obtain happiness, and explain it unto me.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000189">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000190">It hath before been observed by me, that in this world there is a twofold rule of life, that of the Sánkhyas by devotion of knowledge, and that of the Yogís by devotion of action.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000191">The man enjoyeth not freedom from action, by abstaining from action, nor doth he obtain perfection from a total inactivity.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000192">No one ever resteth a moment inactive.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000193">Every man is involuntarily urged to act by those <i>gunas</i> which are inherent in his nature.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000194">The man who restraineth his organs of action and sitteth down with his mind attentive to the objects of his senses, is called a bewildered soul, and a hypocrite.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000195">But the man is praised, who, having subdued all his passions, performeth with his active faculties all the functions of life, unconcerned about the event.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000196">Perform every appointed work, for action is preferable to inaction.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000197">Without action the support of thy body would not be possible.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000198">This world is fettered by all action except in work done on account of sacrifice.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000199">Do thou therefore work for this purpose, but without attachment.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000200">When Prajápati in ancient times created men together with sacrifice, he said: “By this propagate; be this your cow of plenty.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000201">Nourish the gods by this, and let the gods nourish you.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000202">Thus nourishing each other, ye shall obtain supreme happiness.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000203">The gods nourished by sacrifice will grant you the enjoyment of your wishes.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000204">He who enjoyeth what hath been given unto him by them, and offereth not a portion unto them, is even as a thief.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000205">The good who eat the remains of sacrifice are freed from all sins.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000206">Those who dress food but for themselves, eat the food of sin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000207">All things which have life are generated from the food which they eat.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000208">Food is generated from rain; rain from sacrifice; and sacrifice from action.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000209">Know that action springeth from Brahmá; Brahmá proceedeth from the
Indivisible One.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000210">Therefore Brahma, the all-pervading, is ever present in sacrifice.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000211">The sinful mortal, who delighteth in the gratification of his passions, and followeth not the wheel thus revolving in the world, liveth but in vain.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000212">But the man who rejoiceth in his self, pleased with his self, and contented with his self alone hath nothing to do.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000213">He hath no interest either in that which is done, or that which is not done: and there is not, in all things which have been created, any object on which he may place dependence.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000214">Wherefore, perform thou that which thou hast to do, at all times without attachment; for the man who doeth that which he hath to do, without attachment, attaineth to the Supreme.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000215">Janaka and others have attained perfection even by works.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000216">Thou oughtest also to work from regard to the good of mankind.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000217">The man of low degree followeth the example of him who is above him, and doeth that which he doeth.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000218">I myself, Arjuna, have not, in the three regions of the universe, anything which is necessary for me to perform, nor any thing to obtain which is not obtained; and yet I am occupied in work.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000219">If I were not vigilantly to attend to these duties, all men would presently follow my example.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000220">If I should not work, these worlds would sink in ruin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000221">I should be the cause of caste confusion, and should destroy these people.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000222">As the ignorant perform the duties of life from the hope of reward, so the wise man, to promote the general good, should perform the same without motives of interest.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000223">He should not cause destruction in the understandings of the ignorant, who are inclined to outward works.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000224">The learned man, by industriously performing all the duties of life, should induce the vulgar to attend to them.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000225">He whose mind is deluded by <i>ahankára</i> (self-consciousness) thinketh himself the doer of actions which in every way are done by the qualities of Prakriti.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000226">But he who knoweth the truth about the difference from qualities and the difference from actions, formeth no attachments, believing that qualities deal with qualities.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000227">Men who are confused by the <i>gunas</i> of
Prakriti are bound by the works of the <i>gunas.</i> The man who knoweth the whole truth should not cause dull men, who know not the whole, to falter (in action).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000228">Dedicating all actions to me, fixed in thought on the Supreme Spirit, free from hope and egoism, put away thy sorrow and fight.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000229">Those who with a firm belief, and without reproach, shall constantly follow this my doctrine, shall be saved even by works.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000230">Know that those who, holding it in contempt, follow not this my counsel, are astrayed from all wisdom, deprived of reason, and are lost.</span> </p>

<p> <span class="fragm" id="f000231">But the wise man also seeketh for that which is conformed to his own nature.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000232">All things act according to their natures; what then will opposition effect?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000233">In the objects of the senses are fixed affection and dislike.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000234">A wise man should not put himself in their power, for both of them are his opponents.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000235">One's own duty (<i>dharma</i>) though defective, is better than another's duty well-performed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000236">Better is death in one’s own duty; another's duty is full of danger.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000237">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000238">By what, O Krishna, is man constrained to commit offences?</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000239">He seems as if, contrary to his wishes, he was impelled by some secret force.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000240">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000241">It is desire, it is wrath; born from the quality of passion
(<i>rajas</i>); it is insatiable, full of sin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000242">That is our foe in this world.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000243">As fire is covered by smoke, a mirror by dirt, as a foetus is enveloped in the womb, so the world is enveloped by this.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000244">The understanding of the wise man is obscured by this inveterate foe, in the shape of desire, which rageth like fire, and is hard to be appeased.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000245">It is said that the senses, the heart, and the understanding, are the places which are its seat.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000246">By the assistance of these it overwhelmeth reason, and stupifieth the soul.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000247">Thou shouldst, therefore, first subdue thy passions, and get the better of this sinful destroyer of knowledge (<i>jnána</i>), and experience (<i>vijnána</i>).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000248">It is said that the senses are great; greater than the senses is the heart (<i>manas</i>); greater than the heart is the mind
(<i>buddhi</i>)<i>;</i> but what is greater than the mind is That (the Supreme
Being).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000249">Thus knowing that which is higher than the mind, restraining thyself by thyself, slay this unmanageable enemy in the shape of desire.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000250">LECTURE 4</span><br /><br />
</h1>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000251">“THE
YOGA OF KNOWLEDGE.”</span> <br /><br />
</p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000252">THE DEITY SAID:</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000253">This eternal (doctrine of) Yoga, I formerly taught unto
Vivaswat, and Vivaswat taught it to Manu, and Manu made it known unto Ikshwáku.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000254">Being delivered down from one unto another, it was studied by the Rajarshis; until at length, in the course of time, this Yoga was lost.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000255">It is even the same
Yoga which I have this day communicated unto thee, because thou art my servant and my friend.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000256">It is the supreme mystery.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000257">ARJUNA <i>said.</i></span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000258">Seeing thy birth was later than that of Ikshwáku, how am I to understand that thou didst first declare this doctrine?</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000259">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000260">Both I and thou have passed through many births.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000261">Mine are known unto me; but thou knowest not thine.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000262">Although I am not in my nature subject to birth or decay, and am the lord of all created beings; yet, taking command over my own nature, I am born by my delusive power (<i>máyá</i>).</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000263">As often as there is a decline of <i>dharma</i> and an exaltation of <i>adharma,</i> in the world, I produce myself; Thus I am born, from age to age, for the preservation of the good, the destruction of the wicked, and the re-establishment of <i>dharma.</i></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000264">He, O Arjuna, who, truly knoweth my divine birth and work, doth not, upon his quitting his mortal frame, enter into another, for he entereth into me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000265">Many who were free from affection, fear, and anger, thinking on me, finding refuge in me, having been purified by the fire of knowledge, have entered into my being.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000266">I serve men in the way in which they approach me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000267">Men follow my path from every side.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000268">Those who wish for success to their works in this life, worship the gods.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000269">For in this life success from works speedily cometh to pass.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000270">The four castes were created by me according to the apportionment of qualities and works.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000271">Know that I, though action-less and inexhaustible, am the author of them.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000272">Actions defile me not; I have no desire for the fruit of actions.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000273">He who knoweth me thus is not bound by actions.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000274">The ancients who longed for liberation having discovered this, still performed works.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000275">Wherefore perform thou works, even as they were performed by the ancients in former times.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000276">The learned even are puzzled to determine what is work, and what is not.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000277">I will tell thee what that work is, by knowing which thou wilt be delivered from misfortune.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000278">The (natures) of action, forbidden action, and inaction must be well understood.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000279">The path of action is obscure.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000280">He who can see as it were<i>, inaction</i> in action, and <i>action</i> in inaction, is wise amongst mankind.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000281">He is a perfect performer of all duty.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000282">Wise men call him learned whose every undertaking is free from the idea of desire, and whose actions are consumed by the fire of knowledge.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000283">Abandoning the desire of a reward of his actions; always contented and self-reliant, although he may be engaged in a work, he, as it were, doeth nothing.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000284">Unsolicitous, of a subdued mind and spirit, rejecting all surroundings and performing merely bodily work, he committeth no offence.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000285">Contented with whatever he may receive, unaffected by the pairs of opposites
(pleasure and pain, etc.) free from envy, the same in good and evil fortune, he, though he worketh, is not bound.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000286">The work of him in whom attachment is dead, who is freed, whose mind is fixed on knowledge, who performeth actions for (the purpose of) sacrifice, cometh altogether unto nothing.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000287">Brahma is the oblation; Brahma is the sacrificial butter; Brahma is in the fire; by Brahma is the offering made.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000288">Into Brahma will he enter who meditateth on Brahma in his work.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000289">Some devotees offer up sacrifice to the gods; others offer sacrifice by sacrificing only in the fire of Brahma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000290">Others sacrifice hearing and the other senses in the fire of self-restraint; others sacrifice sound and the other objects of sense in the fire of the senses.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000291">Others again sacrifice all the functions of the senses and life-breaths in the fire of self-restraint, kindled by knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000292">Others, also, sacrifice by their wealth, or by austerities, by <i>Yoga,</i> by silent study, and knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000293">Some sacrifice the upward breath in the downward, and the downward breath in the upward, stopping up the channels of the upward and downward breaths, intent on the restraint of breath.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000294">Others, who practise abstinence, sacrifice their life-breaths in life-breaths.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000295">All these are skilled in sacrifice and by sacrifice their sins are destroyed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000296">Those who eat the nectar-like leavings of sacrifices go to the eternal Brahma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000297">This world is not for him who offereth no sacrifice; much less the other.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000298">Many kinds of sacrifice are offered in the presence of Brahma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000299">Know them all to be produced from action; knowing this, thou shalt be free.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000300">The sacrifice of knowledge is better than the sacrifice of wealth.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000301">Every action, in its completeness, is contained in knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000302">Seek, then, this wisdom by prostrations, by questions, and by service, that those learned men who see its principles may instruct thee.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000303">Having known this, thou shalt not again fall into this delusion; for thou wilt see all things first in thyself and then in Me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000304">Although thou wert the most sinful of all sinful men, thou wilt cross over all trespasses by the boat of knowledge.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000305">As the natural fire, O Arjuna, reduceth the wood to ashes, so the fire of knowledge reduceth all actions to ashes.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000306">There is not anything in this world to be compared with knowledge as a purifier.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000307">He who is perfect in devotion, in due time findeth it in his own soul.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000308">He who hath faith findeth knowledge; above all, he who hath gotten the better of his passions; and having obtained it, he quickly enjoyeth supreme repose.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000309">But the ignorant, and the man without faith, whose spirit is full of doubt, is lost.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000310">Neither this world, nor that which is above, nor happiness, can be enjoyed by the man of doubting mind.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000311">Actions do not fetter the man who is self-possessed, who hath renounced action by <i>Yoga</i>, who hath destroyed doubt by knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000312">Therefore slay this doubt, which is born of ignorance, by the sword of knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000313">Give thyself to devotion, and arise, O son of Bhárata.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000314">LECTURE 5</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000315">“YOGA
BY RENOUNCING WORKS.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000316">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000317">Thou now speakest, Krishna of the renunciation of works, and now again of performing them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000318">Tell me positively which of the two is better.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000319">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000320">Renunciation (of works) and <i>Yoga</i> by works, both procure the highest bliss; but of these <i>Yoga</i> by works is better than renunciation of works.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000321">He should be regarded as always a Sannyásí who neither hateth nor desireth; he who is free from the pairs of opposites is easily set free from bonds.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000322">Children—not the learned—speak of the Sánkhya and <i>Yoga</i> (doctrines) as different; but he who devoteth himself to either obtaineth the fruit of both.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000323">The seat which the Sánkhyas obtain is reached by Yogís also.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000324">He seeth truly who seeth that the Sánkhya and Yoga are one.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000325">Renunciation is hard to gain without devotion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000326">The <i>muni</i> who is fixed in devotion goes to Brahma without delay.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000327">He who is fixed in devotion, whose self is pure, who is master of himself and subdueth the senses, who identifieth himself with everything that existeth, is not polluted even though he work.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000328">The man of devotion who knoweth the truth thinketh, that he doeth nothing when seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving, sleeping, breathing, talking, throwing out, taking, opening or closing the eyelids; affirming that the senses deal with the objects of sense.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000329">He who casting off attachment offereth his action to Brahma, is not tainted by sin, as the lotus leaf is not (tainted) in water.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000330">Devotees, giving up attachment, perform actions for the purifying of themselves by the body, the heart (<i>manas</i>), by the mind, and even by the senses alone.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000331">The devout man who hath abandoned the fruit of works attaineth the highest peace.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000332">The undevout, attached to the fruit (of works), through desire, is bound.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000333">The man who hath his passions in subjection, and with his mind forsaketh all works, his soul sitteth at rest in the nine-gate city of its abode, neither acting nor causing to act.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000334">The Lord createth neither the faculty of working nor works, nor the connection of works and fruit; Nature (Prakriti) alone worketh.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000335">The Lord receiveth the sin or merit of none.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000336">Mankind are led astray by their reason being obscured by ignorance; but when that ignorance of their souls is destroyed by knowledge, the Supreme is revealed by knowledge, shining as the sun.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000337">Those whose thoughts are on him (That) whose souls are in him, whose confidence is in him, and whose asylum is in him, are by knowledge purified from all their offences, and go from whence they shall never return.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000338">The wise regard a Brahman gifted with knowledge and modesty, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and a Svapáka as alike.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000339">Even here, those have conquered the world whose minds are equable: since Brahma is sinless and equable, therefore they abide in Brahma.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000340">He who knoweth Brahma, whose mind is fixed, who is not deluded, and who abideth in Brahma, doth not rejoice finding anything agreeable, nor grieve on finding anything disagreeable.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000341">He whose soul is not attached to external objects obtaineth the happiness that is in (one's) self; his self joined by devotion (<i>Yoga</i>)
, <i></i>to Brahma, enjoyeth eternal bliss.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000342">The enjoyments which proceed from the senses? are as the wombs of future pain.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000343">The wise man, knowing that they begin and end, delighteth not in these.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000344">He who can bear up against the violence which is produced from lust and anger in this mortal life, is devout (<i>yukta</i>)<i>,</i> and a happy man.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000345">The man who is happy in his heart, at rest in his mind, and enlightened within, is a <i>Yogí,</i> one with Brahma, and findeth <i>nirvána</i> in
Him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000346">Such Rishis as are purified from their offences, freed from doubt, of subdued minds, and interested in the good of all mankind, obtain <i>nirvána</i> in
Brahma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000347">Such as are free from lust and anger, of humble minds and subdued spirits, and who know the soul, are near to <i>nirvána</i> in Brahma.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000348">The <i>muni</i> who excludeth (from his mind) external objects, (concentrating) the visual power between the brows, and making the upward and downward life-breaths, ever sending both through the nostrils, who restraineth the senses, mind and understanding, intent on final emancipation, from whom desire, fear, and wrath have departed, is indeed forever free (from birth and death).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000349">He knowing me to be the enjoyer of sacrifices and austerities, the mighty lord of all the worlds, and the friend of every living being, attaineth to peace.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000350">LECTURE 6</span></h1>

<p><br />
<span class="fragm" id="f000351">“YOGA BY SELF-RESTRAINT.”</span> <br /><br />
</p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000352">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000353">He is both a <i>Yogí</i> and a <i>Sannyásí</i> who performeth that which he hath to do independent of the fruit thereof; not he who liveth without the sacrificial fire and without action.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000354">Learn, O son of Pándu, that what they call renunciation is the same with Yoga.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000355">He cannot be a Yogí, who, hath not renounced all worldly schemes.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000356">Works are said to be the means by which a man who wisheth, may attain devotion; so rest is called the means for him who hath attained devotion.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000357">He who is not attached to the objects of the senses or to works, renouncing all fancies, is called a perfect Yogí.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000358">He should raise himself by himself: he should not suffer his soul to be depressed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000359">Self is the friend of self; and, in like manner, self is its own enemy.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000360">Self is the friend of him who by himself hath conquered self; but to him who hath not restrained himself, self becometh an enemy.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000361">The soul of him who is self-restrained and placid, is self-contained in heat and cold, in pain and pleasure, in honor and disgrace.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000362">The Yogí who is content with divine and human knowledge, who is unmoved (by any vexations of the world), whose senses are subdued, and to whom a clod, a stone, or gold are alike, is called a perfect devotee (<i>yukta</i>).</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000363">He is esteemed highest who thinketh alike about companions, friends, enemies, strangers, the indifferent, foreigners; and relations, yea to good and evil men.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000364">Let the Yogí constantly practise devotion fixed in a secluded spot alone, with his mind and self-subdued, without expectations and without belongings.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000365">Fixing his seat firmly in a clean spot, neither high nor low, covered with a cloth, a deerskin and kusa grass.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000366">There fixing his heart (<i>manas</i>) on one object, restraining his thoughts, senses and actions, seated on (that) seat he should practise, <i>yoga</i> for the purifying of the self.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000367">Holding his body, head, and neck, even and unmoved, (remaining) steady, looking at the tip of his nose and not looking around; tranquil in soul, free from anxiety, and adhering to the rules of Brahmacharis, he should restrain his mind, (concentrate it) on me, and sit down engaged in devotion, meditating and intent on me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000368">The Yogí, thus constantly devoting his self to abstraction, whose mind is restrained, attaineth peace, the supreme <i>nirvána</i> that is in Me.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000369">Devotion is not for him who eateth too much, or for him who eateth too little; nor for him who sleepeth too much, or who is ever wakeful.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000370">The devotion which destroyeth trouble belongeth to him who is moderate in eating and in recreation, whose inclinations are moderate in action, and who is moderate in sleep.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000371">When he fixeth his well-restrained thoughts on himself alone, and is indifferent to every object of desire, then he is called devoted (<i>yukta</i>).</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000372">The <i>Yogí</i> of a subdued mind, thus employed in the exercise of his devotion, is compared to a lamp, standing in a place without wind, which flickereth not.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000373">When the mind is at rest, restrained by the practice of <i>Yoga</i>, and when seeing the self by the self, is pleased in the self, He becometh acquainted with that boundless pleasure which is far more worthy of the understanding than that which ariseth from the senses; depending upon which, the mind moveth not from its principles;</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000374">Which having obtained, he respecteth no other acquisition so great as it; on which depending, he is not moved by the severest pain.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000375">This disunion from the conjunction of pain is called <i>Yoga.</i> This <i>Yoga</i> must be practised with steadiness and a resolute heart.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000376">When he hath abandoned every desire that ariseth from the imagination, and subdued with his mind every inclination of the senses, he may, by degrees, find rest; and having, by a steady resolution, fixed his mind within itself, let him cease to think.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000377">Wheresoever the unsteady mind wandereth, he should subdue it, bring it back, and place it on the self.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000378">Supreme happiness attendeth the man whose heart is thus at peace; whose passions are thus subdued; who is one with Brahma, and free from sin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000379">The man who is thus constantly in the exercise of the soul, and free from sin, enjoyeth the eternal happiness of union with Brahma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000380">The man whose mind is endued with this devotion, and looketh on all things alike, beholdeth the supreme Soul in all things, and all things in the supreme Soul.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000381">He who beholdeth me in all things, and beholdeth all things in me, I forsake not him, and he forsaketh not me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000382">The Yogí who worshippeth me as abiding in all things, holding that all is one, dwelleth in me, however he may be living.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000383">The man, O Arjuna, who, from what passeth in his own breast, whether it be pain or pleasure, beholdeth the same in others, is esteemed the best Yogí.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000384">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000385">From the fickleness of our natures, I conceive not the permanent duration of this doctrine of equanimity which thou hast told me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000386">The mind, O Krishna, is naturally unsteady, turbulent, strong, and stubborn.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000387">I esteem it as difficult to restrain as the wind.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000388">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000389">The mind, O valiant youth, is undoubtedly unsteady, and difficult to be confined; yet, it may be restrained by practice and indifference (to worldly objects.)</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000390">In my opinion, this divine discipline, which is called <i>Yoga,</i> is hard to be attained by him who hath not his soul in subjection; but it may be acquired by him who taketh pains, and is self-restrained.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000391">ARJUNA <i>said.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000392">Whither, O Krishna, doth the man go after death, who, although he be endued with faith, hath not obtained perfection in his devotion, because his unsubdued mind wandered from the discipline?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000393">Doth he not perish like a broken cloud, being unsteadfast and deluded in the path (leading) to
Brahma?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000394">Be pleased, O Krishna, to destroy completely this doubt of mine, for none but thyself is able to destroy this doubt.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000395">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000396">His destruction is found neither here nor in the world above.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000397">No man who hath done good goeth unto an evil place.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000398">A man whose devotions have been broken off by death, having enjoyed for unnumbered years the rewards of his virtues in the regions above, at length is born again in some holy and respectable family; Or else he is born in the house of some learned <i>Yogí.</i> But such a birth in this life is difficult to attain.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000399">Being thus born again, he is endued with the knowledge which he had in a former body; and here again he beginneth to labour for perfection.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000400">By that former practice he is led on, even without his will.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000401">He who only desireth to know <i>Yoga</i>, goeth beyond the Brahmic word (the Vedas).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000402">The <i>Yogí</i> who, labouring with all his might, is purified of his offences, and, after many births, is made perfect, at length goeth to the supreme abode.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000403">The <i>Yogí</i> is superior to ascetics, respected above the men of knowledge, and superior to the doers of works; wherefore, O Arjuna, resolve thou to become a <i>Yogí.</i> Of all <i>Yogís,</i> I respect him as the most devout, who hath faith in me, and who serveth me with his self stayed on me.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

</div>

<script src="fragTexts.js"></script>
</body>

</html>
