<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta name="generator" content="epub3xhtml 1.0"/>
<meta name="originator" content="HTML"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,height=1024"/>
<title>epub3xhtml output</title>
<style>
  html                    {color: #333; font-size: 18px; font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;
                          line-height: 1.7; text-align: justify;}
  body                    { margin: 2em; margin-top:60px; margin-top:8vh;}
  h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6  { text-align:center; clear:both; }
  pre                     { white-space: pre-wrap; }</style>
</head>

<body>
<div>

<h1><span><span> </span></span></h1>

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000001"><span><span>THE BHAGAVAD GITA</span></span></span></h1>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000002"><span>COMPILED FROM VARIOUS WRITERS,</span> 1895</span></p>

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000003">LECTURE VII</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000004">“YOGA
THROUGH SPIRITUAL DISCERNMENT.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p> <span class="fragm" id="f000005">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000006">Hear, O Arjuna, how having thy mind attached to me, being in the exercise of devotion, and making me alone thy asylum, thou wilt, without doubt, become acquainted with me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000007">I will instruct thee in this wisdom and learning without reserve; which having learnt, there is not in this life anything further to be known.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000008">A few amongst ten thousand mortals strive for perfection; and but a few of these who strive and become perfect, know me according to my nature.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000009">Earth, water, fire, air, ether, the heart (<i>manas</i>) and also the mind (<i>buddhí</i>) , <i></i>and egoism (<i>ahankára</i>), these
(form) the eightfold division of my material nature (<i>Prakriti</i>).</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000010">This is the lower (nature), but know now my other higher nature, the living principle by which the universe is sustained.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000011">Know that all things have these as their source.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000012">I am the producer and the destroyer of the whole universe.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000013">There is nothing else higher than myself.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000014">All this is strung together in me as a row of pearls upon a string.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000015">I am taste in the waters, I am the light in the sun and moon, I am Om in all the Vedas, sound in ether, the masculine force in man.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000016">I am the sweet smell in the earth, the brightness in the fire, the vital principle in all beings, and the austerity (<i>tapas</i>) of ascetics.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000017">Know that I am the eternal seed of all things that exist.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000018">I am the intellect of the intelligent, the splendour of the splendid.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000019">I am the strength of the strong; free from desire (<i>káma</i>) and passion (<i>rajas</i>)<i>.</i> I am desire in living beings not forbidden by <i>dharma.</i> Know also that the natures which are of the quality of goodness, and those which are of the quality of passion, and of darkness are indeed all from me: I am not in them, but they are in me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000020">The whole of this world being bewildered by the influence of these three <i>gunas</i>, knoweth not that I am distinct from these and eternal.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000021">This divine illusion (<i>máyá</i>) of mine, formed by the <i>gunas,</i> is hard to overcome: they who worship me alone pass over this illusion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000022">The wicked, the foolish and the low-minded come not unto me, because their understandings, being bewildered by <i>máyá,</i> they partake of the nature of
Asuras.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000023">Four classes of righteous men worship me: the distressed, one who is seeking after knowledge, one who wants wealth, and one who is possessed of knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000024">Of these the best is the one possessed of knowledge, if he always practises devotion, and worships the One.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000025">I am extremely dear to the wise man and he is dear unto me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000026">All these are noble; but I esteem the man possessed of knowledge even as myself, because his devout spirit dependeth upon me alone as his ultimate goal.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000027">The wise man proceedeth not unto me until after many births; for the exalted mind, who sayeth that “Vasudeva is the All,” is hard to find.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000028">Those whose understandings are drawn away by this and that pursuit, go unto other gods, observing divers rites, constrained by their own natures.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000029">If anyone, worshipping with faith, desire to worship any deity, I make that faith of his steady.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000030">Possessed of that faith, he seeketh to propitiate (the deity in) that form, and obtaineth from him the benefits which he desireth, (though they are) really given by me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000031">But the gain of these men of narrow minds is perishable.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000032">Those who sacrifice to the gods, go to the gods.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000033">Those who worship me, come to me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000034">The ignorant, being unacquainted with my supreme nature, which is superior to all things, and exempt from decay, believe me, who am invisible, to exist in the visible form under which they see me.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000035">I am not visible to all, because I am concealed by my power of delusion (<i>yoga máyá</i>).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000036">The ignorant world do not discover this, that I am not subject to birth or decay.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000037">I know, O Arjuna, all the beings that have passed, all that are present, and all that shall hereafter be; but there is not one amongst them who knoweth me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000038">All beings are bewildered in this world by the delusion caused by the pairs of opposites, arising from desire and aversion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000039">But the men who are pure in their deeds, in whom sin is dead, freed from the delusion of opposites, and firm in their beliefs, worship me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000040">Those who finding refuge in me strive for deliverance from old age and death, know the Brahma, the Supreme Spirit (Adhyátma), and all <i>Karma</i>.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000041">The men devoted in mind who know me as Adihbúta (Lord of beings), as Adhidaiva
(Lord of gods), and as Adhiyajna (Lord of sacrifice), known me indeed at the time of departure (from this world.)</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000042">LECTURE VIII</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000043">“THE
YOGA OF THE SUPREME ETERNAL BRAHMA.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000044">ARJUNA <i>said.</i></span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000045">What is that Brahma?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000046">What Adhyátma, and what is Karma
(work, action)?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000047">What is that called Adhibúta, and that called Adhidaiva?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000048">Who is
Adhiyajna and how here in this body?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000049">How do self-restrained men know thee at the time of their decease?</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000050">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000051">Brahma is the Supreme, the Indestructible; his own nature is called Adhyátma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000052">The emanation that causeth the birth of all living beings is called Karma (work).</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000053">Adhibúta is (my) perishable nature, and Adhidaiva is the male (creative) principle (<i>purusha</i>).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000054">The Adhiyajna is I myself in this body.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000055">At the end of time, he, who quitting the body, departeth thinking only of me, without doubt, entereth unto my being; or else, whatever other nature he shall call upon, at the end of life, when he shall quit his mortal shape, he shall over go unto it.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000056">Wherefore at all times think of me alone and fight.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000057">Let thy heart and mind be placed on me alone, and thou shalt, without doubt, go unto me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000058">The man who longeth after the Divine and Supreme Being, with his mind intent upon the practice of devotion, goeth unto him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000059">The man who shall in his last hour meditate on the ancient sage, the Ruler, smaller than an atom, the Preserver of all, unimaginable in form, shining like the sun above the darkness, with unwavering heart, and by the force of <i>Yoga</i> draweth his breath together between his eyebrows that man goeth to this Supreme Divine
Being.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000060">I will now briefly explain to thee that path which they who know the
Veda call Imperishable; which the men of subdued minds and conquered passions enter; and which, desirous of knowing, they live the lives of Brahmacharins.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000061">He who hath closed with the gates (of the senses), confined his heart (<i>manas</i>) inwardly, placed the vital breath in the head, constant in devotion; repeating the syllable Om, signifying the eternal Brahma, thinking upon me, he who thus departeth goeth, when he quitteth the body, to the highest place.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000062">He who thinketh constantly of me, his mind undiverted by another object, I will at all times be easily found by that constantly devout <i>Yogí.</i></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000063">These great-souled men, having attained to me, come not again to life which is transient and the seat of pain: they reach the highest perfection.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000064">Know O Arjuna, that all the worlds, even to that of Brahma, return again; but he who findeth me, returneth not again to mortal birth.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000065">They are acquainted with day and night, who know that the day of Brahma is as a thousand revolutions of the <i>yugas,</i> and that his night extendeth for a thousand more.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000066">At the approach of day all the visible (manifested) universe issues from the Unmanifested; on the approach of night it dissolves in
Him who is called the Unmanifested.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000067">This multitude of beings, produced again and again, dissolves at the approach of night; and comes forth, not by its own power, at the approach of day.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000068">But there is another invisible eternal existence superior to this visible one which, when all created things perish, doth not perish.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000069">It is called the Unmanifested, the Imperishable; this men speaks of as the highest way: those who attain it never return.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000070">This is my supreme abode.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000071">He, the highest Purusha, in whom all things dwell, and by whom all this (universe) is spread out, may be reached by devotion to him only.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000072">I will now speak to thee of that time in which, should
Yogís die, they will never return; and of that time, in which dying, they shall return (to life).</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000073">Those holy men who know Brahma, departing this life in fire, light, the daytime, in the bright season of the moon, within the six months of the sun's northern course, go unto him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000074">But those who depart in smoke, night, the moon's dark season, and whilst the sun is yet within the southern path of his journey, ascend for a while into the regions of the moon, and again return to mortal birth.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000075">These two<i>, light</i> and <i>darkness,</i> are esteemed the world's eternal ways: he who walketh in the former path returneth not; whilst he who walketh in the latter cometh back again upon the earth.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000076">A <i>Yogí,</i> acquainted with these two paths will never be perplexed; wherefore, O
Arjuna, be thou employed at all times in devotion.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000077">The devotee who knoweth this obtaineth all the holy fruits offered by the Vedas, by sacrifices, austerities, and almsgiving, and he attaineth to the supreme primeval seat.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000078">LECTURE IX</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000079">“YOGA
THROUGH THE ROYAL KNOWLEDGE AND THE ROYAL MYSTERY.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000080">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000081">I will now make known unto thee, who dost not cavil, that most mysterious secret, accompanied by experience, which having studied thou shalt be delivered from misfortune.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000082">It is a royal knowledge, a royal mystery, sublime and immaculate; clear unto the sight, virtuous, eternal and easy to be performed.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000083">Men who believe not this doctrine, attain not to me, but return into this world of death.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000084">All this universe hath been spread out by me, by my unmanifested material nature (<i>prakriti</i>).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000085">All things dwell in me; I do not dwell in them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000086">And yet these things dwell not in me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000087">See my royal mystery.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000088">My spirit, the source of all, supporteth all things, but doth not dwell in them.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000089">Understand that all things rest in me, as the mighty air, which passeth everywhere, resteth forever in the <i>ákásha.</i> At the end of <i>a kalpa</i> all things enter my material nature; at the beginning of <i>a kalpa,</i> I send them forth again.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000090">Supported by my material nature, I send forth again and again all this collection of beings, without their own will, by the power of
Prakriti.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000091">But these actions do not bind me, who remaineth like one unconcerned, and who am unattached to those actions.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000092">Under my supervision Prakriti produceth both the movable and the immovable.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000093">It is in this way, O Arjuna, that the universe revolveth.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000094">The foolish, being unacquainted with my supreme and divine nature, as Lord of all things, despise me in this human form.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000095">Partaking of the delusive nature of Rakshasas and Asuras, they are of vain hope, of vain endeavours, of vain wisdom, and void of reason.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000096">But men of great souls, partaking of the divine nature, discover that I am before all things and incorruptible, and serve me with their hearts undiverted by other gods.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000097">Men of steadfast and laborious lives come before me, humbly bowing down, forever glorifying my name; and they are constantly employed in my service; Others, offering up the sacrifice of knowledge, worship me as one, as distinct, and as all-pervading in many forms.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000098">I am the offering, I am the sacrifice, I am the offering to
<i>pitris,</i> I am the sacred herb; I am the sacred verse and the sacrificial butter; I am the fire; I am the burnt-offering.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000099">I am the father, mother, sustainer, the grandsires of this universe; I am the object of knowledge the means of purification, the syllable Om, the Rik, Sama, and Yajus also.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000100">I am the way, the sustainer, the Lord, the witness, dwelling, refuge and friend, the origin and destroyer (of life), the place, the receptacle, and the inexhaustible seed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000101">I cause heat; I withhold and send forth the rain; I am immortality and death; I am <i>sat</i> (that which is) and <i>asat</i> (that which is not).</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000102">Those who know the three (Vedas), who drink of the soma juice, being purified of their offences, offer sacrifices, and petition for heaven.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000103">These obtain the holy world of Indra, in which they feast upon the divine food of the gods.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000104">When they have partaken of that spacious heaven for a while, in proportion to their virtues, they sink again into this mortal world, as soon as their stock of merit is expended.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000105">In this manner those, who, longing for the accomplishment of their wishes, follow the religion pointed out by the three (Vedas), obtain a transient reward.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000106">To those who serve me alone, and who are thus constantly engaged in my service, I bring full assurance (of happiness).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000107">Those also who serve other gods with a firm belief, in doing so, worship even me, but not according to ancient rule.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000108">I am the partaker, and also the Lord of all sacrifices.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000109">Because mankind are unacquainted with my true nature, they fall again from heaven.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000110">Those who make vows to the gods, go to the gods; those who make vows to the <i>Pitris,</i> go to the <i>Pitris</i>; those who worship the <i>Bhútas</i>, go to the <i>Bhútas</i>; and those likewise who worship me, go to me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000111">I accept and enjoy the holy offerings of the humble soul, who in his worship presenteth leaves and flowers, and fruit and water unto me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000112">Whatever thou doest, O Arjuna, whatever thou eatest, whatever thou sacrificest, whatever thou givest, whatever thou shalt be zealous about, make each an offering unto me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000113">Thou shalt thus be delivered from the bond of works, producing good and evil fruits; and if thou be united to me by devotion and renunciation, thou, when freed, shalt come unto me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000114">I am alike to all beings; to me none is hateful, none is dear; but those who worship me devoutly dwell in me and I in them.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000115">Even if one of evil life worshippeth me and not any other, he must certainly be deemed to be good, for he hath judged rightly.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000116">Soon he becometh a pious one, and attaineth eternal peace.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000117">Rest assured that they who worship me never perish.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000118">For even those of sinful birth, women, Vaisyas, and Sudras likewise resorting to me attain the supreme goal.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000119">How much more then holy
Brahmans and pious Rajarshis who are my devotees.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000120">Having come into this transient unhappy world, worship me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000121">Fix thy heart (<i>manas</i>) on me; become my devotee; my worshipper; reverence me, and thus making me the supreme object, thou wilt come to me.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000122">LECTURE X</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000123">“YOGA
BY THE DIVINE PERFECTIONS.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000124">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000125">Hear again, O large-armed one, my supreme words, which I will speak unto thee, who art well pleased, because I am anxious for thy welfare.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000126">Neither the hosts of Suras nor the great Rishis know of my birth; because I am the origin of all the gods and great Rishis.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000127">The mortal who knoweth me, as unborn and without beginning, the mighty Lord of the world, is undeluded, and is freed from all sin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000128">The various qualities incident to natural beings, such as reason, knowledge, unembarrassed judgment, patience, truth, humility, meekness, pleasure and pain; birth and death, fear and courage; mercy, equality, gladness, charity, zeal, renown and infamy, all distinctly come from me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000129">So in former days the seven great Rishis, the four Ancients, and the Manus partaking of my nature, were born from my mind, from whom are descended all the inhabitants of the earth.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000130">He who knoweth truly this pre-eminence and mystic power of mine, is without doubt endued with an unerring devotion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000131">I am the creator of all things, and all things proceed from me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000132">Those who are endued with spiritual wisdom believe this and worship me: their very hearts and minds are in me; they rejoice amongst themselves, and delight in speaking of my name and teaching one another my doctrine.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000133">I gladly inspire those who are constantly employed in my service, with that mental devotion, (buddhi-yoga) by which they come unto me.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000134">And, in compassion, dwelling in their souls, I dissipate the darkness of their ignorance with the light of the lamp of wisdom.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000135">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000136">Thou art the Supreme Brahma, the supreme abode, the holiest of the holy, the eternal Purusha, first of gods, the unborn, the Lord.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000137">Thus all the Rishis proclaim, as also the divine Rishi, Narada; thus also Asita, Devala<i>,</i> and Vyása; thus thou thyself hast told me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000138">I firmly believe, O Kesava, all thou tellest me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000139">Neither the gods nor the Dánavas are acquainted, O Lord, with thy manifestations.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000140">Thou alone, O best of beings! knowest thyself by thyself; thou, who art the creator of all things, Lord of all, the God of gods, and the universal Lord.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000141">Be pleased to declare fully thy divine emanations by which thou constantly pervadest all these worlds.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000142">How may I know thee, O Yogí, by always meditating on thee?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000143">In what manifestations, O mighty Lord, mayst thou be thought of by me?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000144">Tell me again fully, Janárdana, thy <i>Yoga</i> and thy perfections (<i>vibhúti</i>); for hearing this nectar I feel no satiety.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000145">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000146">Blessings be upon thee!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000147">I will make thee acquainted with only the chief of my divine emanations, as the extent of my nature is infinite.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000148">I am the self seated in the hearts of all beings.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000149">I am the beginning, the middle, and also the end of all beings.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000150">Among the Adityas I am
Vishnu; among shining bodies the resplendent sun.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000151">I am Marichi among the
Maruts, and the moon among the constellations.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000152">Among the Vedas I am the
Sama-Veda; I am Indra among the gods; of the senses I am the <i>manas;</i> in living beings, the intellect (<i>buddhi</i>)<i>.</i> I am Sankara among the
Rudras, and Vittesa among the Yakshas and Rákshasas.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000153">Of the Vasus I am Pávaka
(fire); of mountain peaks I am Meru.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000154">Amongst domestic priests know that I am
Vrihaspati; amongst warriors I am Skanda, and amongst waters I am the ocean.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000155">I am Bhrigu amongst the great Rishis; and of words the syllable (OM).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000156">Of sacrifices, I am the <i>japa</i> sacrifice; amongst firmly-fixed (mountains) the Himalaya.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000157">Among the trees I am <i>aswattha,</i> and of divine Rishis Nárada; of Gandharvas I am Chitraratha; among the perfect ones the <i>Muni</i> Kapila.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000158">Know that amongst horses I am Uchchaihsravas, born of <i>amrita;</i> of elephants, Airávata, and among men, the king.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000159">Among weapons I am the <i>vajra</i> (thunderbolt); of cows the Kámaduk; I am the progenitor Kandarpa; of serpents I am Vásuki.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000160">Among Nága snakes I am Ananta; among beings of the waters, Varuna.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000161">Of the
Pitris I am Aryama, and of judges, Yama.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000162">Among the Daityas I am Prahláda; of things that measure, I am Kála (time).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000163">Of wild beasts I am the lord of beasts (lion or tiger); and
Vainateya of birds.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000164">Of purifiers I am the wind; of those that bare weapons, Ráma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000165">Of fishes I am Makara, and of rivers I am the Ganges.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000166">Of emanations
(creations) I am the beginning and the end, and also the middle.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000167">Among sciences
I am the science of Adhyátman; of orators I am Speech.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000168">I am the letter A among letters; the <i>dwandwa</i> in compound words; I am also endless Time; I am the
Supporter whose face turns everywhere.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000169">I am Death that seizes all, and the
Origin of all to come; among female words I am Fame, Fortune, Speech, Memory, Intelligence, Constancy, and Patience.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000170">Among the songs of the Sama Veda I am the Vrihatsáman, the Gáyatrí among metres; of months I am the Margasirsha; and of seasons the flowery Spring.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000171">Of cheats I am the game of Dice and the
Splendour of the splendid.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000172">I am Victory, I am Perseverance, I am the Goodness of the good.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000173">Of the race of Vrishni I am Vásudeva, of the Pandavas the Subduer of wealth (Arjuna).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000174">Of the <i>munis</i> I am Vyása, and of wise men, Usana, the sage.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000175">I am the Rod of those who restrain, and the Policy of those who wish to conquer.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000176">Of secret things I am Silence, and Knowledge of those who know.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000177">I am, in like manner, O Arjuna, that which is the seed of all things in nature; and there is not anything, movable or immovable, that can exist without me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000178">My divine perfections are without end, and the many which I have mentioned are only by way of example.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000179">And learn, O Arjuna, that everything which is worthy of distinction and pre-eminence, is the produce of a portion of my glory.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000180">But what, O Arjuna, hast thou to do with this manifold wisdom?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000181">I stand supporting all this by only a single part of myself.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000182">LECTURE XI</span></h1>

<p><br />
<span class="fragm" id="f000183">“THE MANIFESTATION OF THE UNIVERSAL FORM.”</span><br /><br />
</p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000184">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000185">This discourse of the supreme mystery, called Adhyátma, which thou hast spoken for my benefit, hath taken away my delusion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000186">I have heard from thee, O lotus-eyed, a full account of the creation and destruction of all things, and also of the mightiness of thy inexhaustible spirit.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000187">According as thou declarest thyself to be, O supreme Lord!</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000188">I desire to see thy form as Ishwara, O best of beings.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000189">If thou thinkest that it may be beheld by me, O Lord of Yoga, show me thy imperishable self.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000190">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000191">Behold my forms, by hundreds, and by thousands, various, heavenly, diverse in colour and shape.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000192">See the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, the two
Aswins and the Maruts also.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000193">See wonders, in numbers never seen before.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000194">Behold, in this my body, the whole world animate and inanimate, and all things else thou hast a mind to see.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000195">But as thou art unable to see with these thy natural eyes, I give thee a divine eye.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000196">Behold my divine mystery.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000197">SANJAYA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000198">Having thus spoken, O King, Hari, the great Lord of Yoga, showed to Arjuna his supreme form as Ishwara.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000199">With many mouths and eyes, with many wonderful sights, with many heavenly ornaments, bearing many heavenly weapons; wearing heavenly garlands and vestments, anointed with heavenly unguents, that all-marvellous (form) shining, boundless, whose face is turned on every side.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000200">If the lustre of a thousand suns were to burst forth at once in the sky, that would be like the splendour of that mighty One.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000201">There the son of
Pandu then beheld in the body of the God of gods, the whole universe in one, and divided into many parts.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000202">Then Dhananjaya was overwhelmed with wonder, and his hair was raised on end.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000203">He bowed down his head before the God, and thus addressed him with joined hands.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000204">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000205">O God, within thy body I see all the gods, as also all the varied hosts of living beings and the Lord Brahmá seated in his lotus-throne, and all the Rishis, celestial snakes.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000206">I see thee, of countless forms, possessed of many arms, stomachs, mouths, and eyes on all sides; but I can neither discover thy beginning, thy middle, nor thy end, O universal Lord of all forms.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000207">I see thee with a crown, and armed with mace and discus, a mass of glory, darting refulgent beams around.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000208">I see thee, difficult to be seen, shining on all sides with light immeasurable, like the burning fire or glorious sun.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000209">Thou art the Supreme Being, incorruptible, worthy to be known!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000210">Thou art the prime Supporter of the universe!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000211">Thou art the never-failing and eternal Guardian of religion!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000212">Thou art from all beginning, and I esteem thee the everlasting Cause.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000213">I see thee without beginning, without middle, and without end; of valour infinite; of arms innumerable; the sun and moon thy eyes; thy mouth a blazing fire, and the whole world shining with thy reflected glory!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000214">The space between the heavens and the earth is possessed by thee alone, and every point around: the three worlds, O mighty Spirit! behold the wonders of thy awful countenance with troubled minds.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000215">Of the celestial hosts, some I see fly to thee for refuge; whilst some, afraid, with joined hands sing forth thy praise.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000216">The Maharshis and Siddhas cry “Swasti,” glorifying thy name with abundant songs of praise.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000217">The Rudras and Adityas, the Vasus, the Sádhyas, the Viswas, the two Aswins, the Maruts, the Ushmapas, with the groups of
Gandharvas, Yakshas, Demons, and Siddhas all stand gazing on thee amazed.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000218">Seeing thy mighty form, with many mouths and eyes; with many arms, legs, and feet; with many stomachs and jaws set with fearful teeth; the worlds alike with me are terrified.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000219">When I see thee, touching the heavens and shining with such glory; of such various hues, with widely-opened mouths, and bright expanded eyes, I am disturbed within me; my resolution faileth me, and I find no rest.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000220">Having beholden thy dreadful teeth, and gazed on thy countenance, emblem of Time's last fire, I know not which way to turn!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000221">I find no peace!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000222">Have mercy then, O God of gods! thou mansion of the universe!</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000223">The sons of Dritarashtra now, with all those rulers of the land, Bhíshma, Drona, the son of Súta, and even the flower of our army, seem to be precipitating themselves hastily into thy mouths, tremendous-toothed! whilst some appear to stick between thy teeth with their heads smashed.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000224">As the rapid streams of full-flowing rivers roll on to meet the ocean's bed; even so those heroes of the human race rush on towards thy flaming mouths.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000225">As troops of insects, with increasing speed, seek their own destruction in the flaming fire; even so these people, with swelling fury, seek their own destruction.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000226">Swallowing all these people, thou lickest them from every side into thy flaming mouths.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000227">The whole universe, O Vishnu, is burning with thy fierce rays.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000228">Reverence be unto thee, thou most exalted!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000229">Deign to make known to me who thou art in this awful form.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000230">I wish to know thy primal life, for this, thy form evolved, I cannot understand.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000231">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000232">I am Time, the destroyer of the worlds, made manifest to slay the human race.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000233">Except thyself, not one of all these warriors arrayed against us, in these numerous ranks, shall live.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000234">Wherefore, arise! seek honor and renown! defeat the foe, and enjoy the ample kingdom!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000235">They are already, as it were, destroyed by me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000236">Be thou alone the immediate agent, left-handed one.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000237">Be not dismayed!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000238">Kill Drona, and Bhíshma and Jayadratha and Karna, and all the other heroes of the war already killed by me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000239">Fight! and thou shalt defeat thy rivals in the field.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000240">SANJAYA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000241">When he who weareth a coronet (Arjuna) heard these words of
Kesava, he saluted him with joined hands; and addressed him in broken accents, and bowed down terrified before him.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000242">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p> <span class="fragm" id="f000243">The universe, O Krishna, rejoiceth because of thy renown, and is filled with zeal for thy service.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000244">The Rákshasas are terrified and flee on all sides; whilst the Siddhas bow down in adoration before thee.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000245">And wherefore should they not, O supreme Soul! bow down before thee, who, greater than Brahmá art the First Cause! eternal God of gods! the world's abode!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000246">Thou art indestructible Being, that which is, that which is not, and what is beyond them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000247">Thou art the First of gods, the ancient Purusha, the supreme Supporter of the universe.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000248">Thou art the Knower and the Known, the supreme Mansion; by thee, O infinite Form, the universe is pervaded.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000249">Thou art
Váyu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the Moon, Prajápati, and Grandsire.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000250">Hail to thee, a thousand times all hail.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000251">Again and yet again, all hail to thee.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000252">Hail to thee from before, hail to thee from behind, hail to thee from all sides, O mighty
All.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000253">Infinite is thy power and glory.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000254">Thou pervadest all things, wherefore thou art all things.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000255">If thinking thee my friend I cried lightly, O Krishna!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000256">O Yádava, or O Friend! not knowing that greatness, and careless in the fondness of my love; if jesting I have shown you disrespect at play, sleeping, sitting or at meals, alone, O sinless One, or with others, pardon me, O Being inconceivable.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000257">Thou art the Father of all things animate and inanimate; thou art the sage Instructor of the whole, worthy to be adored!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000258">There is none like unto thee; where, then, in the three worlds, is there one above thee?</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000259">Wherefore I bow down; and, with my body prostrate upon the ground, crave thy mercy, Lord! worthy to be adored; for thou shouldst bear with me, even as a father with his son, a friend with his friend, a lover with his beloved.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000260">I am well pleased with having beheld things before never seen; yet my mind is overwhelmed with fear.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000261">Have mercy, then, O heavenly Lord!</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000262">O Mansion of the universe! and show me thy celestial form.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000263">I wish to behold thee with the diadem op thy head, and thy hands armed with mace and discus; assume then, O God of a thousand arms, and endless forms, thy four-armed form.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000264">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000265">Well pleased, O Arjuna, I have shown thee, by my mystic power, this my supreme form, universal, glorious, infinite, and eternal, which was never seen by anyone except thyself; For no one, O valiant Kuru! in the three worlds, except thyself, can such a sight of me obtain; nor by the Vedas, nor sacrifices, nor profound study; nor by charitable gifts, nor by deeds, nor by the most severe mortifications of the flesh.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000266">Having beholden my form, thus awful, be not disturbed, nor let thy faculties be confounded.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000267">Relieved from thy fears, and thy mind restored to peace, behold again my own familiar form.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000268">SANJAYA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000269">Vásudeva having thus spoken unto Arjuna, showed him again his natural form; and having re-assumed his milder shape, he presently assuaged the fears of the affrighted Arjuna.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000270">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000271">Having beheld thy gentle human shape, I am again collected; my mind is no more disturbed, and I am once more restored to my natural state.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000272">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000273">Thou hast beholden this my marvellous shape, so very difficult to be seen, which even the gods are constantly anxious to behold.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000274">But
I am not to be seen, as thou hast seen me, even by the assistance of the Vedas, austerities, by sacrifices, by charitable gifts; but I am to be seen, to be known in truth, and entered into by means of that worship which is offered up to me alone; and he cometh unto me whose works are done for me; who esteemeth me supreme; who is my servant only; who is free from attachment, and who liveth amongst all men without hatred.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000275">LECTURE XII</span></h1>

<p><br />
<span class="fragm" id="f000276">“THE YOGA OF WORSHIP.”</span> <br /><br />
</p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000277">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000278">Of those thy servants who are always thus employed, which know Yoga best? those who worship thee as thou now art; or those who serve thee in thy unmanifested and imperishable nature?</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000279">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000280">Those who having placed their minds in me, serve me with constant zeal, and are endued with steady faith, are esteemed the best devoted (<i>yuktamás</i>).</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000281">They too who, delighting in the welfare of all nature, serve me in my incorruptible, ineffable, and invisible form; all-pervading, incomprehensible, dwelling on high, fixed and immovable, with subdued passions and mind (<i>buddhi</i>)<i>,</i> equal-minded to all around, shall also come unto me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000282">Those whose minds are attached to the Unmanifested have the greater labour to encounter; because the path of the Unmanifested is difficult to be found by embodied beings.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000283">They also who, preferring me, renounce all works for me, and, free from the worship of all others, contemplate and serve me alone, I presently raise them up from the ocean of this world of death, whose minds are thus attached to me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000284">Place, then, thy heart on me, let thy mind be stayed on me, and thou shalt, without doubt, hereafter enter unto me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000285">But if thou shouldst be unable, at once, steadfastly to fix thy mind on me, endeavour to find me by means of frequent devotion.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000286">If thou art not equal to frequent devotion, then perform works for my sake; for by performing works with me for their object, thou shalt attain perfection.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000287">But shouldst thou find thyself unequal to this task, put thy trust in me alone, be of humble spirit, and renounce the fruit of action.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000288">Knowledge is better than practice; meditation is better than knowledge; and renouncing the fruit of works than meditation; on renunciation peace follows close.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000289">He my servant is dear unto me, who is free from enmity, the friend of all nature, merciful, exempt from pride and egoism, the same in pain and pleasure, patient of wrongs, contented, constantly devout, of subdued passions, and firm resolves, and whose heart and mind are fixed on me alone.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000290">He also is my beloved of whom mankind are not afraid, and who of mankind is not afraid: and who is free from the influence of joy, impatience, and the dread of harm.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000291">He my servant is dear unto me who wants nothing, is just and pure, impartial, free from distraction of mind, and who hath renounced every enterprise.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000292">He also is worthy of my love, who neither rejoiceth nor findeth fault; who neither lamenteth nor coveteth, and, being my servant, hath renounced both good and evil.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000293">He also is my beloved servant, who is the same to friend and foe, in honor and in dishonor, in cold and in heat, in pain and pleasure; who is unsolicitous about the event of things; to whom praise and blame are as one; who is silent, and pleased with whatever cometh to pass; homeless and who is of a steady mind.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000294">But those devotees who, endowed with faith, attend at the
(banquet of) this sacred nectar, making me their highest aim and worshipping me, these are the dearest to me.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

</div>

<script src="fragTexts.js"></script>


</body>

</html>
