<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta name="generator" content="epub3xhtml 1.0"/>
<meta name="originator" content="HTML"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,height=1024"/>
<title>epub3xhtml output</title>
<style>
  html                    {color: #333; font-size: 18px; font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;
                          line-height: 1.7; text-align: justify;}
  body                    { margin: 2em; margin-top:60px; margin-top:8vh;}
  h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6  { text-align:center; clear:both; }
  pre                     { white-space: pre-wrap; }</style>
</head>

<body>
<div>

<h1><span><span> </span></span></h1>

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000001"><span><span>THE BHAGAVAD GITA</span></span></span></h1>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000002"><span>COMPILED FROM VARIOUS WRITERS,</span> 1895</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000003">LECTURE XIII</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000004">“YOGA
OF THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE KSHETRA AND THE KSHETRAJNA.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000005">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000006">Learn that by the word <i>Kshetra</i> is implied this body, and that he who is acquainted with it is called <i>Kshetrajna.</i> Know that I am that <i>Kshetrajna</i> in every mortal frame.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000007">The knowledge of the <i>Kshetra</i> and the <i>Kshetrajna</i> is by me esteemed knowledge (indeed).</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000008">Now hear what that <i>Kshetra</i> is, what it resembleth, what are its different parts, what it proceedeth from, who he is who knoweth it, and what are its powers.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000009">Each hath been manifoldly sung by Rishis in various measures, and in well-thought-out Brahma-sútras, full of argument.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000010">The great elements, egoism (<i>ahankára</i>), intellect (<i>buddhi</i>)<i>,</i> the unmanifested (<i>Prakriti</i>), the ten senses, the one (organ, the <i>manas</i>), and the five objects of sense; desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, body, thought, courage, these are briefly described as the <i>kshetra</i> in its modified forms.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000011">Humility, sincerity, harmlessness, patience, honesty, service to a preceptor, purity, constancy, self-restraint, indifference towards objects of sense, and absence of self-consciousness; perception of the evil of birth, death, old age and disease, freedom from attachment, indifference towards son, wife, home and the rest, and constant equanimity in desired or undesired events; constant worship of me without meditation on any other; frequenting of solitary places and distaste for assemblages of men; perseverance in acquiring knowledge of the Adhyátma, and perception of the gain that comes from knowledge of the truth; this is called knowledge; that is ignorance which is opposed to this.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000012">I will now tell thee that which is the object of knowledge, knowing which immortality is gained; the supreme Brahma, without beginning, neither existent (<i>sat</i>) nor non-existent (<i>asat</i>).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000013">It has hands and feet on all sides; it has eyes, heads, and faces, and ears on all sides; it pervades everything in the world.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000014">Without the senses, but possessing all the knowledge derived from them; unattached, yet sustaining all things; free from
(the influence of the three) qualities, yet possessing every quality.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000015">Without and within all beings; motionless and yet moving; undiscernable through its subtlety; afar and yet near.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000016">It is undivided, yet in all things it standeth divided.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000017">It is to be known as the sustainer of all things; it is that which now destroyeth, and now produceth.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000018">It is the light of lights, and it is declared to be beyond darkness.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000019">It is wisdom, that which is the object of wisdom, and that which is to be obtained by wisdom; and is placed in the hearts of all.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000020">Thus hath been briefly described what <i>is kshetra,</i> knowledge, and the object of knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000021">He who worshippeth me knowing this is fitted to become one with me.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000022">Learn that both Prakriti and Purusha are without beginning, and know that all developments and their qualities spring from Prakriti.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000023">Prakriti is said to be the cause of the activity of the organs of action; Purusha is called the cause of the sensation of pleasure and pain.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000024">For Purusha, when joined with Prakriti, experiences the influence of the qualities which spring from Prakriti.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000025">Its connection with these qualities is the cause of its birth in a good or evil womb.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000026">The supreme Purusha in this body is called observer, director, protector, partaker, the great Lord, and the supreme self also.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000027">He who knoweth this Purusha and the Prakriti, together with the qualities, to be even so as I have described them, however living, he is not again subject to mortal birth.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000028">Some by meditation see the SELF in the self, by the SELF; others by the Sánkhya-yoga, and others by the Karma-yoga.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000029">Others again, who are not acquainted with this, but have heard it from others, worship.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000030">But even these, who act but from the report of others, pass beyond the gulf of death.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000031">Know, O chief of the race of Bhárata, that everything which is produced in nature, whether animate or inanimate, is produced from the union of <i>Kshetra</i> and <i>Kshetrajna,</i> (matter and spirit).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000032">He who seeth the
Supreme Lord dwelling alike in all beings, and not destroyed though they are destroyed, seeth indeed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000033">For he who seeth the Lord abiding everywhere alike doth not destroy himself by himself, and thus goeth to the supreme self.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000034">He who seeth that works are wrought in every case by Prakriti, and that therefore the soul is not the doer, seeth indeed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000035">When he seeth that the varied natures of beings exist in One, and proceed from it, then he becometh one with Brahma.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000036">This eternal Supreme Spirit, without beginning, without qualities, doth not act, and is not soiled even when it is embodied.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000037">As the all-pervading akásha is not soiled through its subtlety, so the soul stationed everywhere in the body is not soiled.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000038">As a single sun illuminateth the whole world, so the <i>Kshetrajna</i> lighteth up the whole <i>Kshetra.</i> Those who by the eye of knowledge thus understand the difference between <i>Kshetra</i> (matter) and <i>Kshetrajna</i> (spirit, matter-knowing) and the deliverance of beings from Prakriti, go to the Supreme.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000039">LECTURE XIV</span></h1>

<p><br />
<span class="fragm" id="f000040">“YOGA BY SEPARATION FROM THE THREE GUNAS.”</span> <br /><br />
</p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000041">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000042">I will now reveal unto thee the most sublime knowledge, superior to all others, which having learnt, all the <i>munis</i> have passed from it to supreme perfection.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000043">Having acquired this knowledge, they enter into my nature and are not born again when <i>a kalpa</i> begins, nor disturbed at the general dissolution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000044">The mighty Brahma is my womb.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000045">In it I place my foetus; and from it cometh all things that exist.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000046">The mighty Brahma is the womb of all those various forms which are conceived in every natural womb, and I am the father who soweth the seed.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000047">There are three <i>gunas</i> arising from <i>Prakriti:
Sattwa</i> (goodness)<i>, Rajas</i> (passion), and <i>Tamas</i> (darkness); and each of them confineth the incorruptible spirit in the body.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000048">Of these goodness, because of its purity, is clear and free from defect, and intwineth the soul with the bond of happiness and knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000049">Know that passion, being of the nature of desire, bindeth the soul with the bond of action.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000050">But know that darkness, born of ignorance, deludeth all embodied souls, and bindeth them by heedlessness, idleness, and sleep.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000051">Goodness bindeth by pleasure; passion by action; but darkness, having shrouded knowledge, bindeth by folly.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000052">When passion and darkness have been overcome, goodness remaineth; when passion and goodness, then darkness; when darkness and goodness, then passion (remaineth).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000053">When the bright light of knowledge prevaileth at all the gates of the body, one may know that goodness is matured.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000054">Avarice, activity, undertaking of works, restlessness, desire, are produced from the prevalency of passion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000055">Darkness, inertness, stupidity and delusion are produced when darkness is matured.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000056">If a mortal meeteth death when goodness prevaileth, he goeth to the spotless worlds of those who know the highest.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000057">Encountering death when passion prevaileth, he is born amongst those who are attached to the fruits of their actions; if he depart when darkness prevaileth, he is born in the wombs of the ignorant.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000058">The fruit of a good action is said to be goodness and to be spotless; the fruit of passion is pain; and the fruit of darkness is ignorance.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000059">From goodness is produced knowledge; from passion, avarice; and from darkness, negligence, delusion, and ignorance.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000060">Those who are settled in goodness, rise up; those whose nature is of passion, remain in the middle; while the dark, who abide in a state of vile qualities, go down.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000061">When the seer perceiveth no agent except the <i>gunas,</i> and knoweth what is above the <i>gunas,</i> he entereth into my being.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000062">When the embodied (self) hath passed beyond the three <i>gunas,</i> from which all bodies have sprung, then, freed from birth, death, old age, and pain, it drinketh the nectar of <i>amrita.</i></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000063">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000064">By what marks is it known that a man hath passed over these three <i>gunas?</i> What is his practice?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000065">What are the means by which he overcometh them?</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000066">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000067">He, O son of Pándu, who hateth not brightness, activity, nor even delusion, when they come upon him, nor longeth for them when they disappear; who, like one who is of no party, is unagitated by the <i>gunas,</i> who standeth apart and wavereth not, thinking merely that the <i>gunas</i> are now in action.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000068">He to whom pleasure and pain are alike, self-contained, to whom a clod, a stone, and gold are alike; the same to things loved and unloved; firm; to whom praise and blame are equal; the same in honour and disgrace; who regardeth friend and foe alike; who renounceth all action; such a one hath surmounted the <i>gunas</i>.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000069">And he who serveth me alone by the <i>yoga</i> of devotion, having overcome the influence of the <i>gunas,</i> is fit for absorption into Brahma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000070">For I am the abode of Brahma, of imperishable ambrosia, of eternal <i>dharma</i>, and of complete happiness.</span></p>

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000071">LECTURE XV</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000072">“YOGA
IN ATTAINING PURUSHOTTAMA.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000073">They say that the eternal <i>Aswattha</i> hath its roots above, its branches below, its leaves are hymns; he who knoweth it, knoweth the
Vedas.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000074">Its branches shoot forth upwards and downwards, nourished by the <i>gunas;</i> its buds are the objects of the senses; its roots grown downwards, the bonds of action in the world of men.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000075">-Its form is not to be known here, neither its beginning, nor its end, nor its nature.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000076">When a man hath cut down this <i>Aswattha,</i> whose root is so firmly fixed, with the strong axe of non-attachment, from that time, that place is to be sought from whence there is no return for those who find it; I refer to that original Purusha whence the eternal stream emanated.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000077">Those who are free from pride and delusion, who have conquered the evil of attachment, who are always devoted to the Adhyátma, who have overcome desire, who are liberated from the pairs of opposites, known as pleasure and pain, go undeluded to the eternal seat.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000078">Neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the fire enlighteneth that place from whence there is no return; that is my supreme abode.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000079">An eternal portion of me having become an individual soul in the world of mortals, draweth to itself the five senses, with <i>manas</i> as the sixth, placed in Prakriti.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000080">Whenever the Lord entereth or abandoneth a body, these he taketh with him, as the wind doth the odour of flowers.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000081">He presideth over the organs of hearing, seeing, feeling, tasting, and smelling, together with the <i>manas,</i> and enjoyeth the objects of the senses.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000082">Those who are deluded do not see him when he departeth or stayeth; nor when connected with the <i>gunas,</i> he enjoyeth; but those who have the eyes of knowledge perceive.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000083">Yogís, intent thereon, see him abiding within their selfs; whilst those of unformed minds and weak judgments, fail although they try.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000084">Know that the light which proceedeth from the sun, and illuminateth the whole world, and the light which is in the moon, and in the fire, are mine.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000085">Entering the earth I support all things by my energy, and having become the fragrant Soma, I nourish all plants.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000086">Becoming fire and dwelling in the bodies of all creatures, and united with the upward and downward breaths, I cause digestion of the fivefold food.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000087">I am placed in the heart of all; from me come memory, knowledge, and reason, I alone am to be learnt from all the Vedas, I am the author of the Vedántas, and I alone know the Vedas.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000088">In this world there are two existences, the Perishable and the Imperishable.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000089">The Perishable includes all living things.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000090">The Imperishable is called “The unchanging.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000091">But there is another, the highest existence, called the supreme Spirit, who as the eternal Lord (<i>Iswara</i>) , <i></i>pervadeth the three worlds and supporteth them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000092">Since I excel the Perishable and am higher than even the Imperishable, I am celebrated in the world and in the
Vedas as the best of beings (<i>Purushottama.</i>) He who is not deluded and knoweth me to be thus, the Supreme Existence, he, knowing all, worshippeth me in every way.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000093">Thus, O Arjuna, have I made known unto thee this most mysterious doctrine; and he who understandeth it shall be a wise man, and the performer of all that is fit to be done.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000094">LECTURE XVI</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000095">“THE
YOGA OF DIVISION BETWEEN GODS AND ASURAS.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000096">Fearlessness, purity of heart, steadfastness in the Yoga of wisdom, almsgiving, self-restraint, and sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity, uprightness, harmlessness, truth, freedom from anger, renunciation, tranquillity, kindness, universal compassion, absence of desire, mildness, modesty, gravity, courage, patience, firmness, chastity, freedom from vindictiveness and vanity; these are his who is born with divine qualities.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000097">Deceit, pride, self-conceit, anger, and also harshness and ignorance are his who is born with demoniac (Asuric) qualities.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000098">Divine qualities are deemed to be for liberation; the demoniac for bondage.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000099">Grieve not, O son of Bhárata, thou art born with divine qualities.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000100">There are two kinds of beings in this world, the divine, and the demoniac.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000101">The divine hath been fully explained.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000102">Hear from me what is the demoniac.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000103">Demoniac persons know not action or inaction; no purity or good conduct or truth is found in them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000104">“The world,” they say, “is without truth, devoid of order or a ruler, produced by union (of the sexes), caused by lust, and nothing else.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000105">Fixed in this view, those ruined souls, of little understanding and cruel in deeds, are born for the destruction of the world.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000106">Entertaining insatiable desires, full of deceit, vanity and folly, they hold false notions through delusion, and lead impure lives.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000107">Indulging in numberless thoughts ending in death, given up to the enjoyment of objects of desires, feeling sure that that is all.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000108">Bound by the hundred bands of hope, and placing all their trust in lust and anger, they seek by injustice the accumulation of wealth, for the gratification of their lusts.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000109">“This, today, hath been acquired by me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000110">I shall obtain that desire of my heart.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000111">This wealth I have, and that shall I have also.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000112">This foe have I already slain, and others will I forthwith vanquish.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000113">I am a lord, and I enjoy; I am successful, I am powerful, and I am happy; I am rich, of noble birth, and where is there another like unto me?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000114">I will sacrifice, I will give alms, and be merry.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000115">In this manner do these men talk, deluded by ignorance.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000116">Surrounded by the net of delusion, devoted to the enjoyment of their desires, they fall down into an impure hell (Naraka.)</span></p>

<p>   <span class="fragm" id="f000117">Being self-conceited, stubborn, and ever in pursuit of wealth and pride, they offer, with hypocrisy, lip-sacrifices and not according to divine ordination; devoted to egotism, violence, lust and anger, these revilers hate me in their own bodies and in those of others.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000118">These men, hating
(me), cruel, the vilest of mankind, impure, I cast down perpetually into the wombs of asuras.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000119">Having entered demoniac wombs, deluded in every birth, they go down to the vilest state without ever coming to me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000120">The threefold gate of hell—lust, wrath, and avarice—is the ruin of the soul; therefore let every man renounce these three.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000121">The man released from these three ways to darkness, worketh out his own welfare and thus proceedeth to the highest goal.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000122">He who abandoneth the ordinances of the Sastras, to follow the dictates of his lusts, attaineth neither perfection, happiness, nor the highest goal.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000123">Therefore let the Sastras be thy rule in determining what is to be done or left undone.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000124">Knowing what is declared by the ordinances of Scripture, so oughtest thou to act.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000125">LECTURE XVII</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000126"><i>“</i>YOGA
BY THE THREEFOLD KINDS OF FAITH.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000127">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000128">What is the state of these men who offer sacrifice and worship with faith, yet neglect the precepts of the Sastras?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000129">Is it one of
“Goodness,” “Passion,” or “Darkness?”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000130">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000131">The faith of the embodied is threefold, each born of its own nature.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000132">It is “good,” “passionate," or “dark” in kind.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000133">Hear what these are: The faith of everyone agrees with his nature.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000134">Whatever is a man's faith, that is a man himself.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000135">Men of goodness worship the Devas; men of passion, Yakshas and Rákshasas; men of darkness, Pretas and Bhútas.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000136">Men who practise severe austerities, not authorised by the Sastra, full of hypocrisy and self-conceit, full of lust, passion, and violence.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000137">Those fools torturing the groups of organs in the body, and me also seated in the body; know that these have a demoniac tendency.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000138">There are three kinds of food which are dear unto all men; so also are sacrifice, austerity, and almsgiving.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000139">Hear what are their distinctions.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000140">The food that is dear unto the “good” is such as increases their length of days, their power and their strength, and keeps them free from sickness, happy, and contented.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000141">It is pleasing to the palate, nourishing, permanent, and congenial to the body.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000142">Men of “passion” desire bitter, sour, saline, over-hot, pungent, harsh, inflaming foods, causing pain, grief, and sickness.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000143">That which is stale, tasteless, putrid and corrupt, leavings also and filth, is the food dear to men of “darkness.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000144">That sacrifice which is directed by divine precept, and is performed without the desire of reward, as necessary to be done, and with an attentive mind, is “good.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000145">The sacrifice which is performed with a view to the fruit and for ostentation is “passionate".</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000146">The sacrifice which is performed against the precepts of
(scripture), without the distribution of food, without the usual invocations, without gifts to the Brahmans, and without faith, is “dark.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000147">Respect to the gods, Brahmans, Gurus, and the wise, with purity, rectitude, life as a Brahmacharin, and innocence, are called the austerity of the body.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000148">Speech that causes no agitation, which is truthful, pleasant and good, with the constant recitation of the Sastras, is called the austerity of speech.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000149">Calmness of mind, equanimity, silence, self-control, and purity of nature, these are called the austerity of the heart (<i>manas</i>.)</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000150">This threefold austerity practised by devout men in perfect faith, who long not for the fruit of action, is called “good.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000151">The austerity which is done for the sake of gaining respect, honour, and reverence, and with hypocrisy, is called
“passion-born”: it is uncertain and transitory.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000152">That austerity is called “dark” which is done for a foolish purpose, for the torture of one's self, or to destroy another.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000153">The gift which is bestowed by the disinterested, because it is proper to be given, in due place and season, and to proper objects, is “good.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000154">That which is given in expectation of a return, or for the sake of the fruit of the action, and with reluctancy, is “passionate.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000155">That which is given out of place and season, and to unworthy objects, and, at the same time, ungraciously and scornfully, is pronounced to be “dark.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000156">Om, Tat and Sat are said to be the threefold designation of
Brahma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000157">By That Brahmans, the Vedas, and sacrifices were created of old.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000158">Hence
Om is always uttered by those who know Brahma at the beginning of sacrifice, alms, and austerity ordained by rule.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000159">Tat (that) is said when the various kinds of sacrifice, austerity, and alms are done without expectation of fruit by those who desire emancipation.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000160">Sat is employed to denote truth and goodness.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000161">It is also used in the sense of a praiseworthy act.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000162">Whatever is performed without faith, whether it be sacrifice, deed of charity, or austerity, is called <i>Asat;</i> and is of no account for this world or that which is above.</span></p>

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000163">LECTURE XVIII</span></h1>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000164">“THE
YOGA OF LIBERATION BY RENUNCIATION.”</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000165">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000166">I wish much to comprehend the true nature of abandonment (<i>sannyása</i>)
, <i></i>and also of renunciation (<i>tyága</i>), each separately.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000167">KRISHNA <i>said</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000168">By abandonment the wise understood the rejection of actions done with desire; the wise call the forsaking of the fruit of works renunciation.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000169">Some wise men declare that (all) action should be abandoned as an evil; others that works of sacrifice, almsgiving, and austerity, are not to be given up.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000170">Sacrifices, alms, and austerities, are the purification of the wise.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000171">It is my certain opinion and decree, that such works are absolutely to be performed, leaving aside attachment and fruit.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000172">The abandonment of works which are appointed to be performed, is improper.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000173">The forsaking of them, through folly and distraction of mind, ariseth from the influence of darkness.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000174">The forsaking of a work because it is painful, and from the dread of bodily affliction, ariseth from passion, and he who thus leaveth undone what he ought to do, shall not obtain the fruit of forsaking.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000175">The work which is performed because it is appointed and esteemed necessary to be done, and with a forsaking of the consequences and the hope of a reward, is, with such forsaking, declared to be good.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000176">The renouncer endowed with goodness, free from doubts, hath no aversion for an unprosperous work, and no attachment for one that is prosperous.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000177">It is impossible for an embodied person to refrain entirely from action; but he who abandoneth the <i>fruit</i> of action is said to be a renouncer.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000178">The threefold fruit of action, wished for, unwished for, and mixed—accrues after death to those who are not possessed of abandonment, but never to renouncers.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000179">Learn from me the five conditions declared in the Sánkhya system as necessary for the completion of every act.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000180">The seat of action, the agent, the various organs, the various movements, also, as fifth, the deities.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000181">The work which a man undertaketh, either with his body, his speech, or his mind, whether it be lawful or unlawful, hath these five agents engaged in the performance.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000182">This being so, the man dull in intellect who regards himself as solely the agent, doth not see rightly.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000183">He who hath no feeling of egoism, and whose mind is not tainted, even though he kill (all) these people killeth not, is not bound (by the action).</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000184">In the direction of a work are three things: knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the kņower.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000185">The accomplishment of a work is also threefold: the implement, the action, and the agent.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000186">The action and the agent are each distinguished by the influence of the three <i>gunas.</i> Hear in what manner they are declared to be after the order of the three <i>gunas.</i></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000187">That by which one eternal essence is seen in all beings, undivided in the divided, is good.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000188">That knowledge is of passion which sees in all things various existences severally divided.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000189">That which is mean, interested in one single object alone as if it were the whole, without any just motive or design, and devoid of truth, is pronounced to be “dark.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000190">The action which is appointed by divine precept, is performed free from the thought of its consequences and without passion or despite, by one who hath no regard for the fruit thereof, is “good.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000191">The action which is performed by one who is fond of the gratification of his lusts, or by the proud and selfish, and is attended with great effort, is “dark.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000192">The action undertaken from delusion, without any foresight of its evil consequences, to others or to one's self, is declared to be “dark.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000193">The agent who is free from attachment and egoism, who is endued with fortitude and resolution, and is unaffected whether his work succeed or not, is said to be “good.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000194">The agent who is passionate, desiring to obtain the fruit of action, who is avaricious, cruel, impure, who feels joy and sorrow, is said to be “passionate.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000195">The agent who is inattentive, indiscreet, stubborn, dissembling, mischievous, indolent, melancholy, and dilatory, is “dark.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000196">Hear also what are the threefold divisions of intellect (<i>buddhi</i>)
, <i></i>and firmness, according to the influence of the three <i>gunas</i>, which are about to be explained to thee distinctly and without reserve.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000197">The intellect which knoweth action and inaction, what is necessary and what is unnecessary, what is fear and what is not, what is liberation and what is bondage, is good.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000198">The intellect which doth not conceive justice and injustice, what is proper and what is improper, as they truly are, is passionate.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000199">The intellect which, being enwrapped in darkness, mistaketh injustice for justice, and all things contrary to their true intent and meaning, is dark.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000200">That steady firmness, with which a man, by Yoga, restraineth every action of the heart, the breath, and the senses, is good.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000201">That firmness by which a man desirous of fruit, persisteth in <i>dharma</i>, in the gratification of his lusts, and the acquisition of wealth, is declared to be passionate.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000202">That firmness, by which a man of low capacity departeth not from sloth, fear, grief, melancholy, and folly, is dark.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000203">Now hear what is the threefold division of pleasure: That pleasure which a man enjoyeth from his labour, and wherein he findeth the end of his pains; and that which, in the beginning, is a poison, and in the end as the nectar of immortality, is declared to be good, and to arise from a knowledge of the self.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000204">That pleasure which ariseth from the conjunction of the organs with their objects, which in the beginning is as sweet as the nectar of immortality and in the end as a poison, is passionate.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000205">That pleasure which in the beginning and the end tendeth to stupify the soul, and ariseth from drowsiness, idleness, and stupidity, is pronounced to be dark.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000206">There is not anything either in heaven or earth, or amongst the hosts of heaven, which is free from the influence of these three <i>gunas</i> which arise from Prakriti.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000207">The duties of Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras have been apportioned according to the qualities born of their own natures.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000208">Tranquillity, self-restraint, austerity (<i>tapas</i>), purity, patience, rectitude, spiritual knowledge, and faith, are the natural duties of a Brahman.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000209">Valour, glory, courage, resolution in battle, liberality, and lordly bearing, are the natural duties of a Kshatriya.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000210">Agriculture, tending of cattle, and trade form the natural duties of a Vaisya.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000211">The natural duty of a Sudra consisteth in service.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000212">A man being contented with his own particular lot and duty obtaineth perfection.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000213">Hear how that perfection is to be accomplished.</span></p>

<p>   <span class="fragm" id="f000214">The man who maketh an offering of his own works to that
Being from whom all beings proceed, and by whom the whole universe is pervaded, by that means obtaineth perfection.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000215">Better is one's own work, though faulty, than another's work well performed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000216">He who doeth the work prescribed by nature incurreth no sin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000217">No one should abandon his natural work even though evil, for every work is surrounded by evil as fire by smoke.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000218">He whose mind is unattached, self-restrained in every part, in whom desire is dead, obtaineth perfect freedom from action by renunciation.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000219">Learn from me briefly how one who hath obtained perfection attaineth to Brahma, the highest knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000220">Gifted with a pure mind, controlling his self by courage, rejecting sound and other objects of sense, casting off love and aversion; Frequenting lonely places, eating little, restraining speech, body, and heart, constantly intent on devotion, free from egoism, violence, pride, lust, wrath, avarice, selfishness, and who is tranquil,—he is fit to be one with Brahma.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000221">Thus comprehending his identity with
Brahma, calm in spirit, he grieveth not, wisheth not, being the same to all beings, he attaineth to supreme devotion in me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000222">By this devotion he knoweth me truly who I am, and how great I am.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000223">Then having known me truly, he entereth into my essence.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000224">Ever performing all actions, always depending on me, he, through my favour, gaineth the eternal imperishable seat.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000225">With thy heart place all thy works on me; prefer me to all things else; given up to the <i>yoga</i> of the mind, think constantly of me; for by doing so thou shalt, by my divine favor, surmount every difficulty which surroundeth thee.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000226">But if, through pride, thou wilt not listen unto my words, thou shalt undoubtedly be lost.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000227">From a confidence in thy own self-sufficiency, thou mayest think that thou wilt not fight: such is a fallacious determination, for the principles of thy nature will impel thee.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000228">Bound by thy own duty, springing from thy nature, thou wilt do even against thy will what through delusion thou desirest to avoid.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000229">The
Lord, residing in the hearts of all, maketh all things, as if mounted on a machine, revolve by his delusive power.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000230">Take refuge in him alone; then by his favour thou shalt obtain supreme happiness, the eternal seat.</span></p>

<p>   <span class="fragm" id="f000231">Thus have I made known unto thee the highest mystery.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000232">Ponder it well in thy mind, and then act as it seemeth best unto thee.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000233">Attend now to these my supreme and most mysterious words, which I will now for thy good reveal unto thee, because thou art dearly beloved of me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000234">Devote thy heart to me, be my devotee, sacrifice unto me alone, and bow down humbly before me, and thou shalt verily come unto me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000235">I promise thee truly (for) thou art dear unto me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000236">Forsaking all <i>dharmas,</i> come to me as thy only refuge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000237">I will release thee from all sins; grieve not.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000238">This doctrine is never to be revealed by thee to anyone who hath not subjected his body by devotion, who is not my servant, who is not anxious to learn; nor unto him who despiseth me.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000239">He who shall teach this supreme mystery unto my devotees, having shown this highest devotion for me, shall doubtless come to me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000240">Nor is there anyone among men who is superior to him in doing what is dear to me; nor shall any on earth be dearer to me than he.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000241">He also who shall read this holy dialogue of ours, will have offered to me the sacrifice of knowledge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000242">This is my decree.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000243">The man, too, who may hear it in faith, without reviling, shall, when liberated, obtain the happy worlds of the virtuous.</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000244">Hath what I have been speaking, O Arjuna, been heard with thy mind fixed on one point?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000245">Is the delusion which arose from thy ignorance, removed?</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000246">ARJUNA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000247">By thy Divine favour, my delusion is destroyed, and the holy doctrine has been received by me.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000248">I am now fixed in my principles, and am freed from all doubt; and I will henceforth act according to thy words.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000249">SANJAYA <i>said</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000250">Thus I heard this wonderful conversation between Vásudeva and the magnanimous son of Pritha, and my hair stood on end.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000251">By the favour of
Vyása, I heard this supreme mystery, <i>yoga,</i> as revealed from the mouth of
Krishna himself, the Lord of <i>yoga.</i></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000252">As, O king!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000253">I recollect again and again this holy and wonderful dialogue of Krishna and Arjuna, I continue more and more to rejoice;</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000254">And as I recall to my memory that most marvellous form of
Hari, my astonishment is great, and I marvel and rejoice again and again!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000255">Wherever
Krishna, the Lord of <i>yoga,</i> may be, wherever Arjuna, the mighty archer, may be, there too, without doubt, are prosperity, victory, and justice.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000256">This is my firm belief.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

</div>

<script src="fragTexts.js"></script>


</body>

</html>
