<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">

<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta name="generator" content="epub3xhtml 1.0"/>
<meta name="originator" content="HTML"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,height=1024"/>
<title>epub3xhtml output</title>
<style>
  html                    {color: #333; font-size: 18px; font-family: Georgia, 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;
                          line-height: 1.7; text-align: justify;}
  body                    { margin: 2em; margin-top:60px; margin-top:8vh;}
  h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6  { text-align:center; clear:both; }
  pre                     { white-space: pre-wrap; }</style>
</head>

<body>
<div>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000001"><span><span>The
French Revolution: a Study in Democracy</span></span></span></h1>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000002">By
Nesta Webster, 1919</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h1><span class="fragm" id="f000003">CHAPTER VII</span></h1>

<h2><span class="fragm" id="f000004">THE REIGN OF
TERROR</span></h2>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h2><span class="fragm" id="f000005">THE SYSTEM OF THE TERROR</span></h2>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p> <span class="fragm" id="f000006">What, then, was the system that produced this later stage of the Terror?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000007">Historians, weary of striving to solve the problem, have declared that there was none, that the Terror happened inevitably, or that the
Terrorists were mad, or that they killed for fear of being killed, or that, as
Thiers expressed it, they went on killing because of “the deplorable habit they had contracted.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000008">Such answers, however, are all unconvincing in view of the evident organization of the Terror and the character of the men by whom it was carried out.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000009">The members of the Triumvirate—Robespierre, Couthon, and St. Just—which had now become all-powerful, were men not of impulse but of cold calculation, and it is impossible to believe that they struck out aimlessly with no ultimate object in view.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000010">What, then, was the motive that inspired them?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000011">Certain contemporaries, recognizing the indisputable fact that the movement had now turned not only against the people, but against many of the most ardent
Republicans and the earlier champions of liberty, advanced the extraordinary theory that Robespierre was a Royalist agent employed by the emigrant princes to carry out their vengeances; and indeed, if the Old Regime had entertained a desire for revenge, it could not have satisfied it more effectually than by the reign of Robespierre.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000012">But that Robespierre, with his insatiable craving for power, should have wished to reinstate the Bourbons is impossible to believe.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000013">Still more absurd was the once accepted theory that the Terror was organized as a desperate measure of defence against “the coalition of kings,” or in order to stimulate the ardour of the Republican armies.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000014">What possible connection could there be between the massacring of peasant women in the extreme west of France and the success of French arms in Germany or Flanders?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000015">What ardour was likely to be stimulated in the soldiers of the Republic when they returned from the field of battle to find their mothers, wives, and children murdered, their homes burnt to the ground?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000016">Moreover, when the Terror broke out, the situation of the armies was in no way desperate; on the contrary, at the very moment that
“terror was made the order of the day”—that is to say, on the 4th of September
1793—Robespierre at the Jacobin Club announced military successes everywhere:
“the armies of the North ... of the Rhine and the Moselle are in a brilliant situation.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000017">The Terror, then, had nothing whatever to do with the question of national defence, but in its later as in its earlier stages was a measure of internal policy.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000018">Now, although we may consult historians in vain for an explanation of this policy, we have only to study the writings of contemporaries who were behind the scenes in the Terror to discover a theory which, whether we accept it or not, provides the only clue to the mystery.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000019">According to these authorities a very definite system was at work in the Comité de Salut Public, which organized the Terror; moreover, this system was the direct outcome of the political creed of its leading members.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000020">In order to understand this we must refer back to the theories of government propounded by the organizers of the Terror during the earlier stages of the Revolution.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000021">Amongst these we find the constantly recurring belief in the impossibility of transforming
France into a Republic.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000022">Thus as late as 1790 Marat had written:</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000023">“In a large State the form of government must be monarchic, it is the only one that is suited to France; the extent of the kingdom, its position and the multiplicity of its connections necessitate it, and we ought to keep to this for many powerful reasons, even if the character of its people admitted of any other choice.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000024">There is undoubtedly a good deal to be said for this theory.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000025">Whether the old aphorism was right or not in stating that “no democracy can hold an empire,” it must be admitted that the history of the world so far has proved that democracy works most harmoniously on a small scale—as in
Marat’s native Switzerland—or in the thinly populated spaces of a colony.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000026">For since the essence of democracy is rule by the will of the Sovereign People, that will must be, as far as possible, unanimous; the Sovereign must not be divided against itself if the system is not to lose its entire <i>raison d’etre</i>.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000027">And obviously, the larger and more varied the population the more difficult it becomes to obtain unanimity.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000028">This conviction of the impossibility of establishing a democratic form of government in so large and thickly populated a country as
France seems to have prevailed amongst the revolutionary leaders of all parties; hence, no doubt, Robespierre’s earlier belief in monarchy and his later desire for a dictatorship.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000029">As to the Girondins, although no definite evidence is forthcoming in support of Robespierre’s accusation that they wished to establish a federal Republic, they undoubtedly realized the almost insuperable difficulty of achieving a harmonious democracy on so large a scale by means of centralized government.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000030">Thus Buzot himself wrote: “If there were a people of gods, says Rousseau, it would govern itself democratically. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000031">As it is, men, who are not gods, must seek elsewhere the best form of government to suit them.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000032">And he went on to ask how, in a nation of 25,000,000, it would be possible to make sure that the wishes expressed by suffrage represented the real will of the nation.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000033">But with the proclamation of the Republic the situation of which Marat had foreseen the danger had been brought about, and the whole country was thrown into confusion; differences of opinion sprang up on every side, and civil war was the inevitable result.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000034">More than this, not only had France become a Republic, but, as we have seen, the further plan was evolved by Robespierre of transforming her into a Socialist State throughout which absolute equality and universal contentment should prevail.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000035">Under the influence of St. Just this plan had assumed definite proportions.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000036">The colony of workmen’s dwellings, which might be said figuratively to represent Robespierre’s conception of an ideal State, was <i>literally</i> adopted by St. Just in the “Institutions” he drew up for the government of
France.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000037">The new Republic was to be founded on “virtue, if not on terror”; that is to say, when terror became no longer necessary, “virtue” was to be made the order of the day.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000038">Every one was to be sober, austere, incorruptible, laborious, and, above all, public-spirited; for, according to the doctrine of the
Illuminati, to whom Robespierre belonged, the only way to make men happy was to produce in them a “just and steady morality”—morality, that is to say, as interpreted by the Illuminati, which was simply civism.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000039">Now in the opinion of St. Just nothing tended so much both to happiness and morality as the profession of agriculture—“a cottage, a field, and a plough” —these were to represent the summit of every man’s ambitions.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000040">Accordingly France was to be turned into a vast agrarian settlement, in which there were to be no rich and no poor, no large properties and no cramped dwellings; nothing but endless model cottages and small allotments tended by hard-working and virtuous cultivators.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000041">An admirable arrangement, no doubt, only unfortunately, in order to ensure its success, there was to be no personal liberty either.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000042">It is doubtful, indeed, whether liberty and equality can exist together, for whilst liberty consists in allowing every man to live as he likes best, and to do as he will with his own, equality necessitates a perpetual system of repression in order to maintain things at the same dead level.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000043">For this purpose, according to St. Just, every department of life must be placed under State control—perhaps the most inexorable form of tyranny it is possible to conceive.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000044">For to an individual autocrat some appeal may be made, but against the doors of a system one may batter in vain.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000045">Thus in St. Just’s Republic every human relationship was to be regulated by the State.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000046">True, free love was to take the place of marriage, but the union thus contracted was to be dissolved at the end of seven years if no children were forthcoming, whether the contracting parties desired to separate or not.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000047">Parents were to be forbidden either to strike or to caress their children, and the children were to be dressed all alike in cotton, to live on “roots, vegetables, fruit, with bread and water,” and to sleep on mats upon the floor.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000048">Boys were to belong to their parents only till the age of five; after that they were to become the property of the State until their dearth.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000049">Every one was to be forced by law to form friendships, and to declare publicly once a year in the Temple who were his friends.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000050">Any infraction of these laws was to be punished by banishment.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000051">Thus—</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000052"><span>He who strikes a child is banished.</span></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000053"><span>If a man commits a crime his friends are banished.</span></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000054"><span>He who says he does not believe in friendship or who has no friends is banished.</span></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000055"><span>He who being drunk shall have said or done evil is banished.</span></span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000056"><span>A man convicted of ingratitude is banished; etc.</span></span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000057">It was an attempt to realize the ideal of Rousseau If there were a people of gods it would govern itself democratically.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000058">The French, so far, were not gods, but they were to be made so.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000059">But could a nation of 25,000,000 be thus transformed?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000060">To the regenerators of France it seemed extremely doubtful; already the country was rent with dissensions, and any scheme for universal contentment seemed impossible of attainment.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000061">Moreover, the plan of dividing things up into equal shares presented an insuperable difficulty, for it became evident that amongst a population of this size there was not enough money, not enough property, not enough employment, not even at this moment enough bread to go round; no one would be satisfied with his share, and instead of universal contentment, universal dissatisfaction would result.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000062">What was to be done?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000063">The population was too large for the scheme of the leaders to be carried out successfully, therefore either the scheme must be abandoned <i>or the population must be diminished</i>.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000064">To this conclusion the surgeons operating on the State had at last been brought.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000065">In vain they had amputated the gangrened limb of the nobility and the clergy, had paralysed the brain by attacking the intellectual classes, had turned (as in Aesop’s fable) upon the stomach, that is to say, the industrial system, by which the whole body of the State was fed, and denied it sustenance—all these means to restore health to the State had failed, and they were now reduced to a last and desperate expedient: the size of the whole body must be reduced.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000066">In other words, <i>a plan of systematic depopulation</i> must be carried out all over France.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000067">That this idea, worthy of a mad Procrustes, really existed it is impossible to doubt, since it has been revealed to us by innumerable revolutionaries who were behind the scenes during the Terror.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000068">Thus Courtois, in his report on the papers seized at Robespierre's house after Thermidor, wrote:
“These men, in order to bring us to the happiness of Sparta, wished <i>to annihilate twelve or fifteen millions of the French people,</i> and hoped after this revolutionary transfiguration to distribute to each one a plough and some land to clear, so as to save us from the dangers of the happiness of
Persepolis.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000069">Another <i>intime</i> of Robespierre, the Marquis d’Antonelle, a member of the Revolutionary Tribunal, actually explained the whole scheme in print whilst the Terror was at its height.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000070">Beaulieu, who met him in prison, where he was incarcerated by Robespierre for giving away the secret of the leaders, thus describes the system as revealed to him by D’Antonelle: “He thought, like the greater number of the revolutionary clubs, that, in order to institute the Republic on the ruins of the monarchy, it was necessary to exterminate all those who preferred the latter form of government, and that the former could only become democratic by the destruction of luxury and riches, which form the support of royalty; that equality would never be anything but a chimera as long as men did not all enjoy approximately equal properties; and finally, that such an order of things could never be established until <i>a third of the population had been suppressed;</i> this was the general idea of the fanatics of the Revolution.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000071">About two years later, that is to say in 1795, the
Socialist, Gracchus Babeuf, employed at the Commune, gave a more detailed account of the scheme in his brochure, “Sur le Systeme de la Depopulation, ou
La Vie et les Crimes de Carrier.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000072">Of this system Babeuf declares that
Robespierre was the principal author: “Maximilien and his council had calculated that a real regeneration of France could only be operated by means of a new distribution of territory and of the men who occupied it”; and he goes on to show the remorseless logic by which Robespierre reached his final conclusion:
“He thought that, firstly, in the present state of things property had fallen into a few hands, and that the great majority of the French possessed nothing; secondly, that in allowing this state of things to continue, equality of rights would only be a vain word in spite of which the aristocracy of owners of property would always be real, the smaller number would always tyrannize over the great mass, the majority would always be the slave of the minority . . .; thirdly, that in order to destroy this power of the owners of property, and to take the mass of citizens out of their dependence, there was no way but to place all property in the hands of the government; fourthly, that one could succeed without doubt only by immolating the great proprietors . . .; fifthly, that, besides this, <i>depopulation was indispensable</i>, because the calculation had been made that the French population was in excess of the resources of the soil and of the requirements of useful industry, that is to say, that, with us, men jostled each other too much for each to be able to live at ease; that hands were too numerous for the execution of all works of essential utility . . .; sixthly, finally—and this is the horrible conclusion—that since the superabundant population could only amount to so much . . . a portion of <i>sans-culottes</i> must be sacrificed, that this rubbish could be cleared away up to a certain quantity, and that means must be found for doing it.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000073">To this necessity Babeuf attributes not only the guillotinades, fusillades, and noyades in the provinces, but also the engineered famine to which he had drawn attention earlier, whilst the war, far from providing a reason for the Terror, was in reality part of the scheme of extermination.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000074">“What,” he asks, “is this plan of eternal crusades, of repulsing peace, of universal conquest, of the conversion or subjugation of all kings and all peoples, if it is not the hidden intention to prevent anyone coming back from amongst that important portion of the nation that armed itself so generously in order to chase the enemy from French territory?”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000075">The evidence of Babeuf is the more valuable since he declares himself to be heartily in agreement with the Socialistic schemes of
Robespierre; it is only the means employed to realize them that he disapproves.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000076">“On the subject of extermination,” he naively concludes, “I am a man of prejudices; it is not given to everyone to rise to the heights of Maximilien
Robespierre.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000077">But later on he came to see that Robespierre’s plan alone could ensure success, and that if absolute equality was to be achieved the Terror must be revived.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000078">It was for the attempt to reinstate the regime of Robespierre that Babeuf finally met his end.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000079">However preposterous the <i>exposé</i> of
Babeuf may seem, we must admit that it is the only one that explains the
Terror.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000080">Moreover, that this was indeed the system on which it was founded does not rest on the authority of Courtois, Babeuf, and D’Antonelle alone, the very words “plan of depopulation” occur repeatedly in the writings and speeches of other contemporaries.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000081">Thus Prudhomme, in describing the massacres of September, explains the enormous proportion of “the people” amongst the victims as the first evidence of this scheme: “The plan of butchery did not end with the destruction of priests and nobles . . . but from that date there existed a <i>plan of depopulation</i> conceived by Marat, Robespierre . . ., etc., and tins is what the method of the Terror has proved.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000082">Later on, at the trials of Fouquier Tinville and Carrier, several witnesses referred to the same scheme: Grandpre of the police declared that the most powerful means employed by Robespierre was “a vast system of depopulation”; Ardenne, Deputy Public Accuser, said the plan was “to clear out the prisons in order to <i>depopulate France</i> ,” and in his summing up to the president and judges of the Revolutionary Tribunal stated that
“Robespierre, St. Just, Couthon, and others, had expected to <i>depopulate
France</i>, and above all to make genius, talents, honour, and industry to disappear”; Trinchard, member of the Revolutionary Tribunal, ended his evidence with the words: “Such was the <i>system of depopulation</i> organized by the last tyrants, and in order to make sure of its execution they employed the most immoral men”; indeed, Carrier himself admitted that “<i>this plan of destruction existed</i>.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000083">Carrier, Fouquier, Freron, Lebon, and the other monsters were therefore only acting on orders from headquarters when they set out to decimate Paris and the provinces, and the terrible phrase of Carrier, “Let us make a cemetery of France rather than not regenerate her after our manner,” simply epitomized the philosophy of Robespierre on which the system of the Comité de Salut Public was founded.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000084">It was in the hall of the committee at the Tuileries that the great scheme of depopulation was discussed, and orders were issued to the revolutionary agents in the different provinces.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000085">Prudhomme has vividly described the scenes that took place nightly in the gorgeous salon at the end of a long dark corridor, where, amidst mirrors and bronzes, beneath gilded ceilings and glittering chandeliers, the “Decemvirs” took their ease on soft armchairs and luxurious sofas, whilst in the background sideboards laden with rare wines and delicate fare awaited them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000086">Around the great oval table, covered with a green cloth, the members of the committee—Billaud, Collot, Couthon, Barére—gathered merrily, “not precisely drunk, but spurred on by wine and good cheer, heated by liqueurs”; only when the bilious face of the Incorruptible appeared amongst them a chill fell over the party, and there was less laughter whilst districts were marked out for destruction and human heads were counted up like scores at cards.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000087">“It was at these times,” says Prudhomme, “that they gave their secret orders to the chief scoundrels in their confidence.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000088">It was there that General Rossignol went to receive the plan for setting La Vendee in a blaze.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000089">It was there that Carrier organized the noyades of Nantes.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000090">It is there that Couthon said, laughing, before he started for Lyon, ‘I have only a head and a body; well, nevertheless, it is I who will give the first blow of the hammer to the second town in the empire of France, in order to destroy it.’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000091">It is there that they organized the conspiracies in the prisons, and that they drew up that plan of depopulation carried out during fifteen months.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000092">A map of
France was spread out continually before the eyes of the Decemvirs as well as a table of the population of each Commune; there they decimated towns and villages—’we must have so many heads in such and such a department.’ . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000093">All the calamities of France, all the crimes of the Revolution, originated in the salon of the Comité de Salut Public.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000094">The precise proportion of the population it would be necessary to suppress formed the subject of calm mathematical calculation amongst the leaders.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000095">According to Larevelliere Lepeaux, it was Jean Bon St. Andr6 who first openly admitted the existence of the scheme, and at the time that the Revolutionary Tribunal was instituted—that is to say, in the spring of
1793—declared in the tribune of the Convention that “in order to establish the
Republic securely in France, the population must be reduced by more than half.”</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000096">Beside this estimate D’Antonelle’s proposal to reduce by one-third only seems comparatively moderate.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000097">Other leading revolutionaries considered, however, that far more drastic measures were necessary; thus Collot d’Herbois held that twelve to fifteen millions of the French must be destroyed, Carrier declared that the nation must be reduced to six millions, Guffroy in his journal expressed the opinion that only five million people should be allowed, to survive, whilst
Robespierre was reported to have said that a population of two millions would be more than enough.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000098">Pages and Fantin Désodoards assert, however, that eight millions was the figure generally agreed on by the leaders.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000099">The plan of the Terrorists was not, therefore, as is popularly supposed, to sacrifice a small minority for the happiness of the great majority, but to annihilate an immense proportion of the nation in order to ensure a contented residuum.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000100">Such, then, was the system of the Terror, and however atrocious it may appear we must admit that it was founded on a perfectly logical premise—the conviction that the smaller the population the better for democracy.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000101">It is not, therefore, the theory of the Terrorists that must be regarded as monstrous, but its application.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000102">For to admit that a certain end may be desirable of attainment is one thing; to believe that any means are justifiable in order to attain it is quite another matter.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000103">The great criminals of history were not the people inspired by the worst motives, but the people for whom this distinction did not exist.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000104">Catherine de Medici—to whom
Robespierre bore a striking resemblance—undoubtedly thought it would be for the peace of France if the Huguenots ceased to exist, and therefore planned the
Massacre of St. Barthelemy; Robespierre may have been actuated by precisely the same laudable intention in organizing the massacres of the Terror.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000105">In both cases the attitude of mind that made this action possible can be traced to the same cause—the doctrine that has produced all the worst atrocities in the history of the civilized world—namely, that “the end justifies the means.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000106">Whether it be under a Torquemada, a Medici, a Robespierre, or a Wilhelm II, the community or nation which accepts the belief that everything is justifiable—lying, duplicity, treachery, and murder—in order to benefit the cause it has embraced, sells its soul to the devil.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000107">To hold this doctrine is not only to repudiate Christianity, but to strike at the very root of all morality.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000108">It was therefore natural that the Terror, founded on this literally diabolical doctrine, should now enter on that hideous phase in its work of destruction—the desecration of the churches.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h2><span class="fragm" id="f000109">THE DECHRISTIANIZATION OF FRANCE</span> </h2>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000110">The leaders of the movement that was now directed against religion all over France belonged to a faction of the Cordeliers Club, led by
Hébert.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000111">Hébert himself, who figured on the cover of his journal, the <i>Pére
Duchesne</i>, as a rugged stove-merchant with a large pipe in his mouth and a heavy moustache, was in reality a dapper young man, clean shaven, well powdered, and sybaritic in his tastes.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000112">The coarse language and oaths of the gutter that characterized his literary compositions were as foreign to his nature as the revolutionary frenzy he affected; for, although it was on Hébert that the mantle of Marat had descended when the <i>Ami du Peuple</i> ceased at the death of its author, Hébert had none of Marat’s sombre ferocity.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000113">On the contrary, Hébert was filled with a riotous <i>joie de vivre</i>.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000114">During the
“great angers” he depicted in the Pére <i>Duchesne</i> he was enjoying “the sweetest and most peaceful of lives”; his sanguinary tirades against the Queen, the Girondins, “la Reine Roland,” were penned beside the cradle of his infant daughter.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000115">H6bert was an Anarchist by temperament rather than by policy; the prototype of the modern Apache, he would gaily have set Paris in a blaze for the excitement of seeing it burning.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000116">Revolutions inevitably bring these sort of characters to the surface—creatures endowed with the passion for destruction that human nature shares in common with the ape, who love to burn and spoil and desecrate without any ulterior motive.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000117">It was for this reason that Hébert ended by incurring the animosity of Robespierre.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000118">The Tiger Cat only desired a period of anarchy in order to establish his own domination, and naturally anyone who, like Hébert, enjoyed anarchy for anarchy’s sake could not be allowed to go on indefinitely wrecking everything; the time must come when it would be necessary to suppress him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000119">Already the green eyes were watching him suspiciously, and it was therefore not Robespierre who in the Comité de Salut Public supported the anti-religious movement of the Hébertistes, but the contemptible comedian
Collot d’Herbois.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000120">Amongst the followers of Hébert were first and foremost
Chaumette, once a cabin-boy, now procurator of the Commune and king of the
Paris rabble; Vincent, secretary to the Ministry of War, a creature of such extraordinary ferocity that in his fits of rage he was known to devour raw the flesh of animals; Momoro, a printer; Anacharsis Clootz, of whom more anon; and
Ronsin, a general in the Republican army who excelled in the raising of disorderly crowds.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000121">Ronsin’s following inspired even its leader with disgust; when someone complained to him of the excesses it committed in the streets and at the theatres, the outrages on women, the robberies and violence that marked its passage, Ronsin answered cynically, “What do you want me to do?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000122">I know, like you, that it is a collection of brigands, but I have need of these rascals for my revolutionary army—find me decent folk who are willing to do the job!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000123">According to Prudhomme the Hébertistes were formerly
Orléanistes; at any rate their private life was far from consistent with the principles of Republicanism and equality that they professed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000124">Whilst proclaiming the necessity of Spartan simplicity to counteract the famine they led a riotous Epicurean existence, and freely indulged their tastes for rare vintages and fiery liquors.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000125">It was thus largely under the influence of drink that they now embarked on their scheme of dechristianization.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000126">On the night of the 6th to the 7th of November, Hébert, Chaumette, and Momoro went to the “Constitutional” bishop of Paris, Gobel, and ordered him to abjure publicly the Catholic religion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000127">“You will do this,” they said to him, “or you are a dead man.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000128">The wretched old man threw himself at their feet and begged to be spared this ordeal, but the Hébertistes were inexorable, and on the following day Gobel, terrorized into submission, presented himself at the Convention and declared that “the will of the
Sovereign People” had now become “his supreme law,” and since the Sovereign so willed it there should be no other worship than that of “liberty and holy equality.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000129">Accordingly he now deposited his cross, ring, and other insignia upon the President’s desk, and put on the red cap of liberty.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000130">Several of his vicars followed his example amidst the enthusiastic acclamations of the
Assembly.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000131">This grotesque scene gave the signal for the desecration of the churches throughout Paris and the provinces.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000132">At Notre Dame, stripped of its crucifixes and images of the saints, the Feast of Reason took place on the 10th of November.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000133">A temple was raised in the aisle on the summit of a mountain, from which shone forth the “light of truth,” and amidst the strains of the
“Marseillaise” and “Ca ira!” the Goddess of Reason, personified by Mile.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000134">Maillard, an opera-singer, dressed in a blue mantle and wearing the red cap of liberty, was borne in procession and solemnly enthroned to the cries of “Vive la Republique!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000135">Vive la Montagne!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000136">At the Church of St. Sulpice, during a ceremony of the same kind, Joachim Ceyrat, the director of the September massacre at the Convent des
Carmes, ascended the pulpit and cried out, “Here am I in this pulpit, from which lies have so long been told to the sovereign people, making them believe that there is a God who sees all their actions.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000137">If this God exists, let Him thunder, and may one of His thunderbolts crush me!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000138">Then looking up to the heavens defiantly, he added, “He does not thunder, so His existence is a chimera!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000139">Another enthusiastic exponent of materialism was the famous
Marquis de Sade, the moral maniac to whom we owe the adjective “Sadie.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000140">The atrocities this most vicious of all aristocrats had committed towards poor women of the people in no way precluded him from an honoured place in the ranks of “democracy.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000141">Sade was a follower of Marat and a member of the Section des
Piques to which Robespierre belonged.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000142">An address from this section drawn up by
Sade himself was now presented to the Convention, demanding that in all the churches the cult of the new divinities, Reason and Virtue, should be substituted for the worship of “the Jewish slave” and “the adulterous woman, the courtesan of Galilee.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000143">This petition was accorded “honourable mention” by the Convention, which ordered it to be sent to the Committee of Public
Instruction.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000144">But it was Clootz who played the leading part in the campaign against religion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000145">Anacharsis Clootz, a Prussian baron, distinguished himself throughout the revolutionary movement by his plan of a “Universal
Republic” and his hatred of Christianity.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000146">The apostle of “Internationalism” as developed in the doctrines of the Illuminati, he said nearly everything that
Internationalists propound to-day as the last word in modem thought.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000147">Briefly, all nations of the earth were to be welded into one as members of “the only nation” (<i>la nation unique</i>), which, by a play on the word <i>german</i>, that is to say, “closely allied,” he suggested, with an ingenuity worthy of his race, should be known as “the immutable empire of Great Germany, the Universal
Republic.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000148">By way of illustration he had presented himself at the Legislative
Assembly, under the title of “the orator of the human race,” at the head of a strange procession composed of specimens from all available races—Germans, Swedes, Russians, Poles, Turks, and negroes—whom he had hired for the occasion, in dresses suited to the part, but, since he omitted to pay them as arranged, he found his own door next day beset by a furious crowd, which seemed somewhat to disprove his theory that “the Republic of the human race will never have any dispute with anyone since there can be no communication between the planets.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000149">In all this Clootz shows himself simply an amiable madman; it is only on the subject of religion that he grows violent.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000150">^The second title he had bestowed upon himself was that of “the personal enemy of Jesus Christ.”</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000151">Christianity filled him with an almost epileptic fury.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000152">“Religion,” he wrote, “is a social disease which cannot be too quickly cured.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000153">A religious man is a depraved animal; he resembles those beasts that are only kept to be shorn and roasted for the benefit of merchants and butchers.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000154">“The People,” he declared, “is the Sovereign and the God of the world; France is the centre of the
People-God; only fools can believe in any other God, in a Supreme Being.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000155">It was in this strain that Clootz addressed the Convention on the 17th of November, and he ended his discourse by presenting the Assembly with a copy of a treatise he had written on the subject.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000156">The Convention thereupon passed a decree: “Anacharsis Clootz, deputy to the Convention, having paid homage with one of his works entitled <i>The Certainty of the Proofs of
Mahomedanism</i>, a work that sets forth the nullity of all religions, the
Assembly accepts this homage, accords it honourable mention, and orders it to be inserted in the bulletin, and to be sent to all the departments (of
France).”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000157">Everywhere in Paris and the provinces a perfect orgy of blasphemy and desecration now began; Bacchanalian feasts took place in the churches, triumphal cars carrying streetwalkers dressed in chasubles, and donkeys laden with sacred relics, bénitiers, and church ornaments, passed through the streets; crucifixes and breviaries were cast into bonfires amidst cries of “Perish forever the memory of the priests!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000158">Perish forever Christian superstition!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000159">Long live the sublime religion of Nature!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000160">But it was not by “the people” these revolting scenes were enacted; the people everywhere bitterly resented them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000161">The closing of the village churches indeed caused so much indignation that the Convention began to fear revolt, whilst in Paris the women of the market overwhelmed the <i>Pére
Duchesne</i> with insults, and one of the hawkers of this journal complained to the “Society of the Friends of the Revolution” that he had been surrounded by these women, who covered him with mud, and seemed disposed to strangle him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000162">When by order of Chaumette the shrine of Sainte-Genevieve, the patron saint of
Paris, was thrown into the flames on the Place de Greve, the outrage infuriated those whom the atheists described as the “ignorant and superstitious populace.”</span>
</p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000163">The truth is, that the whole of the anti-Christian movement was the direct work of the Illuminati.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000164">Anacharsis Clootz, says Robison, “who was a keen Illuminatus, came to Paris for the express purpose of forwarding the great work, and, by intriguing in the style of the Order, he got himself made one of the Representatives of the Nation. . . .”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000165">At the same time another
German Illuminatus, Leuchtsenring, was also employed as secretary or clerk in one of the bureaux of the Assembly.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000166">The inscription put up by order of the
Government in the cemeteries all over France, “Death is an eternal sleep,” had always been the most cherished maxim of the Illuminati.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000167">There was nothing that the people abhorred more than this; to them the belief in immortality seemed the only consolation for the miseries of existence.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000168">“Yesterday,” a government spy reported, “I talked for an hour with a Jacobin, a lemonade-seller, who begins to feel the weight of years.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000169">He preached to me the doctrine of Christ . . . and explained . . . that it was very comforting for a man of a certain age to be able to see in the future another life awaiting him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000170">The philosopher, he added, had other compensations, but for us poor folks . . .!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000171">All such hopes, all such beliefs, were now to be torn from the people; not content with destroying the body, the regenerators of France set out to destroy the soul.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h2><span class="fragm" id="f000172">THE TERROR IN PARIS</span> </h2>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000173">The campaign against Christianity heralded the Reign of
Terror in the capital.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000174">In the same autumn of 1793 the series of executions began that was to continue without interruption, and in ever-increasing numbers, until the 9th of Thermidor.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000175">In order to carry out the great plan of depopulation the Revolutionary Tribunal had been reconstructed at the end of
September and placed entirely under the control of the Comité de Salut Public and its subordinate, the Comité de Sûreté Générale, which dealt directly with the police of Paris.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000176">Instead of twelve jurymen, sixty were now elected; amongst these figured three tailors, five carpenters, a seller of sabots, a bootmaker, etc.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000177">—a fact that should be noted, since it marks the first appearance of men of the people in the Revolutionary Government.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000178">Hitherto it had been by aristocrats or middle-class men that the attacks on the aristocracy and <i>bourgeoisie</i> had been organized; now that the people were to become the victims, it was men of the people who were called in to carry out the work.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000179">But the people were not the first to suffer.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000180">In Paris as in the provinces, as indeed in all revolutions, the task of demolition began at the top and descended by gradual stages to the lower strata of the population.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000181">At the head of the list of victims condemned by the Tribunal of Blood stands
“the widow Capet.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000182">Her trial, which began on the 14th of October, does not, however, enter within the scope of this history; Marie Antoinette, unlike Louis
XVI, had played no part in the popular Revolution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000183">Constantly depicted to the people as a “Messalina” or a “Medici,” whilst to her the people were persistently represented by the revolutionaries as tigers thirsting for her blood, all understanding between them had become impossible, and so throughout the Revolution her attitude towards the people was merely passive.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000184">Yet in reality the people did not hate her.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000185">During those last terrible weeks at the Conciergerie, poor women of the market came to the prison bringing her their finest peaches and melons, and recognizing her gaoler when he came to buy at their stalls, handed him their best fruits and poultry, saying with tears, “For our Queen!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000186">Others displayed still more energy on her behalf.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000187">Who at the last moment, asks M Lenotre, “were the Royalists who risked their lives to rescue the Queen?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000188">A shoe-black, a pastry-cook, three hairdressers, a pork-butcher, several charwomen, two masons, an old-clothes seller, a lemonade-seller, a wine-merchant, a locksmith, and a tobacconist.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000189">Four of these heroic people—two men and two women—paid for their devotion with their heads.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000190">When at last Marie Antoinette appeared before the
Revolutionary Tribunal, broken and white-haired, her eyes dimmed with long weeping, even the <i>tricoteuses</i> of Robespierre were stirred to pity, and it was for this reason that Hébert devised his infamous accusation concerning the little Dauphin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000191">“A week after the Queen’s trial,” says Prudhomme, “I said to that monster Hébert, ‘You must be a great scoundrel to have accused her of so horrible a crime!’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000192">He answered, ‘Having noticed from the beginning of the trial that <i>the public seemed to take an interest in this woman</i>, and for fear she should escape us, I at once drew up my denunciation and passed it to the President, <i>in order to set the multitude against her!</i>’ ”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000193">But Hébert and his kind had not succeeded in degrading the populace to their own level.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000194">The Queen’s immortal protest produced so immense an effect on the women of the tribunes that for some moments the proceedings were interrupted.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000195">This <i>faux pas</i> of Hébert’s infuriated Robespierre.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000196">The day after the Queen’s trial, says Vilate, “Barére had ordered a dinner at
Venua’s to which he had invited Robespierre, St. Just, and me. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000197">Seated around the table in a secret room well closed, they asked me for some features of the scene that took place at the trial of the Austrian.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000198">I did not forget that of outraged nature when, Hébert accusing Antoinette of obscenities with her son of eleven years old, she turned with dignity to the people: ‘I appeal to all mothers present and to their consciences to declare whether there is one who does not shudder at such horrors!’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000199">Robespierre, struck by this answer as by an electric shock, broke his plate with his fork: ‘That imbecile Hébert!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000200">As if it were not enough that she should be a Messalina, but he must make her out to be an Agrippina also, and provide her at her last moment with this triumph of public sympathy.’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000201">Every one appeared stupefied.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000202">Indeed, so thoroughly had popular feeling been aroused in the Queen’s favour that Hébert found it necessary to warn his readers against the women who had planned to call out for mercy when she mounted the scaffold.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000203">But, as at the execution of the King, the revolutionary leaders were prepared for any attempts at rescue; 30,000 armed men lined the streets, and cannons were placed all along the route between the Conciergerie and the Place de la
Revolution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000204">Beside the cart, drawn by one gaunt white horse, that bore the
Queen to her death, rode Grammont, the miserable comedian employed by Philippe d’Orléans in the earlier outbreaks of the Revolution, he who had drunk the blood of the Swiss on the 10th of August at the Tuileries, and now with revolting brutality cried out to the people as the pitiable procession approached the scaffold, “Voici l’infame Antoinette!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000205">Elle est f. . . ., mes amis!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000206">Philippe had at last had his revenge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000207">He was to follow the same road himself less than a month later.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000208">On the whole the people showed themselves indifferent to the execution of the Queen, but they were not indifferent to the fate of the rest of the Royal Family—Louis XVII, his sister and his aunt, Madame Elizabeth, who remained in the Temple.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000209">It seems that Robespierre contemplated killing them all at this crisis, as the following significant passage in a letter addressed to him by one of Iris friends testifies.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000210">According to Robespierre’s desires, says this naive correspondent, his agents have “sounded the people on the subject” by means of circulating the rumour that both the little Capets had died.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000211">“But we had the grief to see our expectations disappointed in this direction.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000212">No one was taken in by our little ruse; everyone said, as if with one accord, ‘Ah! if those two children there are dead, they have been well helped (to die).’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000213">And all appeared—let us say the word—indignant.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000214">Leave there then, believe me, the little Capets and their aunt; even policy demands it, for if you killed the boy the crowned brigands would instantly recognize as King of
France ‘le gros Monsieur de Ham’ (the Comte de Provence).”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000215">It was thus really the people who stood between the poor children in the Temple and their murderers!</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000216">After the Queen followed the Girondins.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000217">On the last day of
October, Brissot, Vergniaud, Gensonne, Garra, Isnard, Ducos, and fourteen other members of the faction were brought before the Revolutionary Tribunal and charged with all the bygone intrigues enumerated by Camille Desmoulins in his <i>Histoire des Brissotins</i>.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000218">By way of emphasizing the accusation of Orléanism, old
Sillery, the one-time boon companion of the Duc d’ Orléans, was added to their number.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000219">Then to ensure their conviction, the same infamous device was adopted as in the case of the King, that of framing a law to fit the case, and on the fourth day of their trial the Convention passed the decree that when a trial had lasted three days the jury should be ordered to give their verdict without listening to further evidence.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000220">Thereupon the jury, obedient to the orders of the Comité de Salut Public, unanimously declared the accused to be worthy of death, and on the 31st of October the “Twenty-One” were executed in the Place de la Revolution.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000221">The rest of the faction, with the exception of Louvet, perished later; Condorcet took poison; Guadet, Salles, and Barbaroux were guillotined in Bordeaux; Buzot and Petion, who attempted flight, were found dead, half devoured by dogs, in the fields of Medoc.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000222">A week later Madame Roland followed the men whom her thirst for vengeance on the Court had driven to their doom.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000223">To the end her hatred of the Queen knew no abating; in her prison she heard of the terrible fate of that proud woman who hated equality” without a stirring of compassion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000224">Manon’s own conception of “equality’ enabled her to confront the scaffold with composure.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000225">“Think,” she wrote to Bose, “how worthless is the <i>canaille</i> that feasts upon the spectacle!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000226">Thus fortified by the consciousness of her own superiority, which in her case was almost a religion, she flung defiance at the Revolution, and from the platform of the guillotine her last words, addressed to the new statue of Liberty before her, were clearly heard by the wondering multitude: “O Liberty, how they have fooled you!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000227">(<i>O Liberté, comme on t’a jouée!</i>) She forgot that she herself had played no small part in the fooling.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000228">Poor old Roland, away at Rouen, hearing of the death of the wife who had long since ceased to love him, went out into a wood and stabbed himself, thereby proving that he was human after all, but, Girondin to the last, he did not forget to leave upon his body a note explaining that these were the remains of a man who had died as he had lived, virtuous an upright.”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000229">So ended the famous Gironde.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000230">Within a month the Queen and her two bitterest enemies all met with the same fate on the same spot; for two days before the execution of Madame Roland, Philippe Égalité had paid the penalty for his crimes.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000231">All the way from the Conciergerie to the Place de la
Revolution the wretched prince was overwhelmed with insults by the populace of whom he had been represented as the idol: “Scoundrel, it is you who are the cause of all our ills!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000232">“It was you who had the Princesse de Lamballe assassinated!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000233">“Wretch, you wished to be King, but Heaven is just, your throne will be a scaffold!’’ Above all, it was as the murderer of Louis XVI the crowd now taunted him: “You voted for the death of your kinsman!’’ and mocking voices repeated the infamous words: “I vote for death!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000234">Philippe listened to all these cries with perfect sang-froid; to him as to every revolutionary, once the game was up, the people were of no account whatever; moreover he had taken the precaution to fortify himself with copious draughts of excellent champagne before leaving his prison cell, and it seems to have been this, rather than the ministrations of his confessor, that inspired him with courage to meet his end.</span>
</p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000235">Danton was away at his chateau in Arcis-sur-Aube when the death of Philippe Égalité occurred, and on his return to Paris at the end of
November it became evident that he had undergone some surprising change.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000236">Was it the soothing influence of country life, or the society of the sixteen-year-old girl he had married three months after the death of his wife, or was it the loss of his patron the Duc d’Orléans that had moderated Danton’s revolutionary ardour?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000237">Or had Danton begun to fear for his own safety?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000238">Where Orléans had gone, were all those suspected of Orléanisme to follow?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000239">These and other theories have been put forward to account for the sudden cooling of Danton’s revolutionary ardour.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000240">M Madelin offers a fresh one by suggesting that Danton had become the victim of neurasthenia.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000241">Yet is Danton’s change of front really so inexplicable?</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000242">Why, after all, should he have wished to continue the Revolution?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000243">Everything that had inspired his diatribes—royalty, aristocracy, Girondisme—had been swept away; his career as agitator was done, and now he was ready to settle down comfortably on the profits of his labours.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000244">It was thus that one day in this winter of 1794, whilst the cold and hungry people of Paris were waiting in ever-lengthening queues for the bread and meat doled out to them in miserable rations, Danton, well warmed and well fed after an excellent dinner at one of the best restaurants in Paris, expressed his attitude to the Revolution: “Well, at last our turn has come to enjoy life!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000245">Delicate food, exquisite wines, stuffs of silk and gold, women one dreams of, all this is the prize of acquired power.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000246">For us, then, for us, all this, since we are the strongest.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000247">After all, what is the Revolution?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000248">A battle.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000249">And shall it not be followed like all battles by the division of spoils amongst the conquerors?”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000250">Under these circumstances it is hardly surprising that
Danton should have failed to enter enthusiastically into that plan of depopulation which led only to the Spartan Republic wherein all these things would be denied him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000251">At any rate, Danton and Camille Desmoulins—who had now become entirely his disciple—began to suggest tentatively that the Terror had gone far enough, and that a committee of clemency should be formed.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000252">“You wish to exterminate all your enemies by the guillotine,” wrote Camille on the 21st of December, “but was there ever a greater folly?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000253">Can you cause a single one to perish on the scaffold without making ten enemies for yourself amongst his family or his friends?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000254">Do you think it is these women, these old men, these dotards, these egotists, these laggards of the Revolution whom you imprison that are the most dangerous?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000255">Of your enemies only the cowards and the sick have remained amongst you.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000256">The brave and the strong have emigrated.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000257">They have perished at Lyon or in La Vendee; all the rest do not deserve your anger.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000258">Meanwhile Danton expostulated with Robespierre.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000259">Let us limit our power to striking great blows profitable to the Republic.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000260">For that reason we must not guillotine Republicans.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000261">Robespierre, intent on his plan of depopulation, thought otherwise.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000262">He knew that amongst so-called Republicans there was, as yet, no hope of unity, that on one side the Hébertistes with their passion for destruction, on the other the Dantonistes with their schemes for self-enrichment, would never allow him to establish in peace that model colony of austere equality that was his dream.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000263">Therefore Hébertistes and Dantonistes must go, and according to his customary plan Robespierre set out to destroy one faction by another.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000264">He had used Hébert to bring about the final doom of the Queen and the
Girondins, now he used Danton to rid him of the Hébertistes.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000265">In this order of campaign he showed his profound wisdom; to have reversed the process, that is to say to have attempted to demolish the Dantonistes with the aid of Hébert, might have proved his own undoing, for the people, drawn to Danton by his plea for clemency, might have rallied round him, but for Hébert, since his attacks on religion, the great majority of the people felt nothing but contempt.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000266">Robespierre, therefore, had the people whole-heartedly with him when he now denounced the atheistic movement of the Hébertistes.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000267">“Atheism,” he said at the Convention, “is aristocratic.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000268">The idea of a great Being who watches over oppressed innocence and punishes crime triumphant is wholly popular.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000269">In these words Robespierre had surpassed himself as a crowd exponent—if the people wanted a God, well, he would give them one, and thereby establish his power on an immutable foundation.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000270">The Feast of the Supreme Being eight months later formed the corollary to this design.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000271">Danton, quick to see the advantage offered by this attitude, followed Robespierre’s speech a few days later with a further denunciation of the “antireligious masquerades” that had recently taken place, and the two leading demagogues thus joining forces had no difficulty in crushing the wretched Hébertistes out of existence.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000272">On the 21st of March 1794 Hébert , Ronsin, Momoro, Vincent, Clootz, and several foreign intriguers—Proly, Desfieux, Pereyre, and others—were led before the Revolutionary Tribunal on a charge of conspiring with foreign powers, notably with Pitt, to overthrow the Republic.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000273">As far as Pitt was concerned, of course, not a shred of evidence could be produced, but certainly, if foreign powers had desired to destroy France, they could not have chosen more effective measures than those adopted by this anarchic gang.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000274">Clootz, as has been already said, had undoubtedly been sent to France in order to create anarchy, but whether with the collusion of the King of Prussia it is impossible to know.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000275">Robespierre, at any rate, profoundly distrusted this Prussian apostle of
Internationalism.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000276">In vain Clootz had declared that “his heart was French and his soul was <i>sans-culotte</i>”; Robespierre in demanding his expulsion from the Jacobin Club on the 12th of December had observed drily, “Citizens, will you regard as a patriot a foreigner who desires to be more democratic than the
French? . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000277">Never was he the defender of the French people, but of the human race. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000278">Paris swarms with intriguers, with English and Austrians; they sit amongst you with the agents of Frederick. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000279">Clootz is a Prussian.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000280">The exponent of universal brotherhood as expressed by the massacres of September—for it will be remembered that it was Clootz who had regretted that they had not “Septemberized” enough—had thus failed to inspire his French brethren with confidence, and now, arraigned before the
Revolutionary Tribunal, was obliged to hear his system of a Universal Republic stigmatized as “a profoundly premeditated perfidy which gave a pretext for the coalition of crowned heads against France.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000281">When finally the eighteen “conspirators” were condemned to death by the Tribunal, Clootz appealed in vain to the “human race” against the judgement; the human race that filled the tribunes responded merely with frantic applause.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000282">Paris went nearly mad with joy at the execution of the
Hébertistes; immense crowds collected as the criers went through the streets proclaiming the verdict; the air resounded with shouts of “The Pére Duchesne to the guillotine!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000283">Even the populace, whom Hébert, in the days when he held it at his command, had described as “the only good and pure element of the great
Parisian family,” rejoiced at the downfall of its former idol.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000284">Although by now it had begun to grow tired of the spectacle of the guillotine, it prepared on this occasion to assemble in force around the scaffold.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000285">The only fear was that the Place de la Revolution might not prove large enough to hold so vast a multitude.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000286">Every window in the Rue Saint-Honore was let to see the procession pass.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000287">In the markets, at the street corners, people collected in groups, saying to each other, “It was the rascal Hébert and his clique who wished to make us die of hunger; with the fall of this infernal faction we shall see once more peace and abundance.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000288">Hébert’s own bloodthirsty phrases were passed derisively from mouth to mouth: “He!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000289">He! the stove-merchant is going to put his <i>nose</i> out of the little window!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000290">“He is going to sneeze into the sack!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000291">Some were of opinion that the guillotine was too gentle a mode of execution, and that something more lingering and painful should be devised for such scoundrels—conspirators “a thousand times more criminal than Capet and his wife.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000292">When at last, at four o’clock on the fine spring afternoon of the 24th of March, the tumbrils bearing their eighteen victims made their appearance, so immense a crowd had collected that the procession was continually held up on its way to the scaffold.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000293">The pitiful spectacle of Hébert sobbing helplessly, and almost in a state of collapse, had no power to touch the hearts in which more than anyone he had helped to kill all sentiments of humanity, and it was his own refrains that now echoed in his ears as the cruel mob surged around him singing in chorus, and with hands and feet drumming out the measure:</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000294">Ran plan, ran plan plan-plan,</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000295">Ran plan, ran plan –plan,</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000296">Tambour, un ran!</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000297">or else with shrieks of ghoulish laughter:</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000298">Drelin, drelin, drelin!</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000299">A la guillotine!</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000300">The other Hébertistes listened to all this with disdain;
Clootz above all remained immovable, for if, as a contemporary relates, he was
“dying of fright,” it was only “lest any of his companions should believe in
God, and he preached materialism to them until his last breath.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000301">As the tumbrils entered the Place de la Revolution a mighty roar arose from the assembled multitude, and thousands of voices began to chant the revolutionary “Complainte” of “Rougyff.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000302">One after another the victims ascended the scaffold.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000303">Hébert’s head was the last to fall.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000304">As he lay tied to the plank the executioner playfully danced the blade of the guillotine over the wretched man’s neck before allowing it finally to descend, and the populace, that only a few months earlier had adored Hébert, greeted this brutal jest with laughter and applause.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000305">But if on this occasion the mob of Paris showed itself ferocious, it was the only execution, except that of Robespierre, at which such scenes took place.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000306">In general it will be noticed throughout the Revolution that the men the people ended by hating most were those with whom they had been most intimate, and who had promised them the most.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000307">They liked Marat, Robespierre, and Hébert as long as these demagogues promised them a millennial age and appeared to be, as they professed, true friends of the poor, living in Spartan simplicity and sharing their privations.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000308">But when the people discovered they had been deceived, when no millennium dawned, above all when they realized that their idols feasted whilst they themselves went hungry, they turned and rent them with all the fury of blighted hope and disappointed love.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000309">For this reason Danton did not end by incurring the animosity of the people; the “<i>grand seigneur</i> of the <i>Sans-Culotterie</i>” had always kept aloof from the crowd, had never promised to share the good things of life with them, never pretended to be one of them; no draggled herd of <i>jupons gras</i> had followed in his wake, no adoring <i>tricoteuses</i> had hung upon his lips in the tribunes of the Convention.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000310">The people only knew him now from the distance as a great voice in the Assembly, as a great <i>bon-vivant</i> outside it; they were well aware that he lived principally for women and good cheer, and being Parisians rather liked him for it.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000311">The people, therefore, did not rejoice at the death of the
Dantonistes which took place on the 5th of April.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000312">For now that Danton had served his purpose by helping to rid him of the “anarchic” gang, Robespierre lost no time in turning his attention to the remaining faction.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000313">Only one week after the execution of the Hébertistes, Robespierre hurled his thunderbolt at the head of Danton, and he hurled it by the hand of St. Just.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000314">This was really extraordinarily ingenious, for, as Danton’s past connection with the Orléaniste conspiracy formed the chief ground of accusation against him, Danton might well have retaliated, if the charge had been made by Robespierre himself, with the reminder that he, “Incorruptible” though he was, had nevertheless worked with the conspirators in the early days of the Revolution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000315">Against St. Just, however, no such insinuations could be made.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000316">This irreproachable young man, who moved through the scenes of the Terror like a marble Antinous “with his feet in blood and tears,” had only joined the revolutionary movement as a deputy of the
Convention, and could not be suspected of complicity with previous intrigues.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000317">It was, therefore, to St. Just that Robespierre confided the materials for a great indictment of the Dantonistes on precisely the same lines as Camille
Desmoulins’ indictment of the Girondins a year earlier.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000318">It is impossible to read the pamphlet of Camille concurrently with the speech of St. Just and not to recognize that in both the chain of reasoning must have been evolved by the same brain, though in one it is expressed with the sprightly verve of the pamphleteer, in the other with the sober logic of the politician.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000319">And even more than the <i>Histoire des Brissotins</i> of Desmoulins, the “Rapport” of St. Just provides the most damning indictment of the Revolution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000320">No Royalist has ever exposed more remorselessly the workings of the great revolutionary intrigues; Montjoie himself could not have penned a clearer resume of the
Orléaniste conspiracy and its subsequent ramifications than is contained in the following passages: “You have marched,” St. Just said to the Convention, “between the faction of false patriots and that of the moderates you must overthrow.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000321">These factions, born with the Revolution, have followed in its course as reptiles follow the course of rivers . . . the party of Orléans was the first constituted; it had branches in all the governments, and in the three legislatures (<i>i.e.</i> in the Constituent and the Legislative Assemblies and the Convention).</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000322">This criminal party, lacking audacity . . ., always dissimulating and never boldly venturing, was carried away by the energy of the men of good faith and by the force of the people’s virtue; it followed always the course of the Revolution, shrouding itself continually and never daring.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000323">This is what made people believe at the beginning that Orléans had no ambition, for in the best prepared circumstances he lacked courage and resolution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000324">These secret convulsions of the dissimulating parties were the cause of public misfortunes.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000325"><i>The popular Revolution was the surface of a volcano of extraneous conspiracies</i>.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000326">The Constituent Assembly, a senate by day, was by night a collection of factions which prepared the policy and artifices of the morrow.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000327">Affairs had a double intention; one ostensibly and gracefully coloured, the other secret, leading to hidden results <i>contrary to the interests of the people</i>.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000328">They made war on the nobility, the guilty friend of the Bourbons, in order to pave the way to the throne for Orléans.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000329">One sees at each step the efforts of this party to ruin the Court, its enemy, and to preserve royalty, but the loss of one entailed the other; no royalty can exist without a patriciate. . . .</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000330">“There was a faction in 1790 to place the crown on the head of Orléans; there was one to maintain it on the head of the Bourbons; there was another faction to place the House of Hanover on the throne of France.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000331">These factions were overthrown with royalty on the 10th of August; terror forced all the secret conspiracies in favour of monarchy to dissimulate more profoundly than ever.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000332"><i>Then all these factions took mask of the Republican party</i>;
Brissot, Buzot, and Dumouriez continued the faction of Orléans; Carra the faction of Hanover; Manuel, Lanjuinais, and others the party of the Bourbons.”</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000333">Now, though the last passage displays some inconsistency—for it will be remembered that during the Massacres of September Robespierre had accused
Brissot of being in league with Brunswick—the preceding statements concerning the factions will be seen exactly to coincide with those of Montjoie, Beaulieu, Pages, the “Deux Amis de la Libérte,” and others quoted earlier in this book; and thus, even in the opinion of Robespierre and St. Just, the French
Revolution was not, as is generally supposed, a struggle between monarchy and republicanism, or between autocracy and democracy, but simply a ramification of conspiracies by various factions to usurp power <i>at the expense of the people</i>.</span>
</p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000334">After this admirable preamble St. Just proceeded to describe the role played by the Dantonistes throughout the Revolution—he spoke of Danton’s connection with Mirabeau, “who was meditating a change of dynasty, and realized the value of his audacity”; he referred to Danton’s collusion with the petition of the Champ de Mars in 1791, his nomination of Orléans to the
Convention, his intrigue with Dumouriez to ensure the safe retreat of the
Prussian armies after Valmy; in scathing terms he described his “cowardly and constant abandonment of the public cause” at times of crisis, by invariably adopting the plan of retreat, notably on the 9th of August, when he had betaken himself to his bed whilst the revolutionary army was mustering; and he ended by denouncing the love of riches that distinguished the Dantonistes, their “need of pleasures acquired at the cost of equality.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000335">As a matter of fact no one at the time doubted Danton s venality, nor did this greatly injure him in the mind of the public, since few of the revolutionary leaders had shown themselves proof against the seduction of money; Robespierre would not have won the title of “Incorruptible’ if he had not been almost unique in this respect.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000336">Danton himself had hitherto made no secret of his greed for gold, only when charged with it before the
Revolutionary Tribunal did he attempt denial: “I—sold?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000337">Men of my stamp are not to be bought; the seal of liberty and Republican genius are stamped in ineffaceable characters on their foreheads.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000338">The trial of the Dantonistes—Danton, Desmoulins, Fabre d’Églantine, Herault de Sechelles, Lacroix, Philippeaux presented one of the strangest scenes of all the Revolution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000339">Danton, who had entered the court “like a furious bull plunging into the arena with lowered horns,” attempted to carry off the situation with a high hand, now chaffing the judges or throwing bread pellets at their heads, now breaking out into furious bellowings, but never refuting the accusations brought against him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000340">Again and again the President was obliged to call him to order, reminding him that his anger and his coarse invectives were damaging his case.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000341">Outside the hall of the Tribunal an immense crowd listened breathlessly whilst the thunder of Danton s voice rolled out through the open windows across the Seine, where further crowds had gathered; and as each resounding phrase struck on their ears, the people passed it on till it reached the farthest limits of that vast multitude.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000342">Finally the Tribunal, adopting the same illegal methods that had been employed at the trial of the King and of the Girondins, cut short the proceedings and pronounced sentence of death.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000343">Danton’s fury now knew no bounds; transferred to his cell at the Conciergerie to await execution, he continued to bellow incoherent phrases through his prison bars:</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000344">“It was on this day that I instituted the Revolutionary
Tribunal, but I ask pardon from God and men; it was not that it might become the scourge of humanity, it was to prevent a renewal of the massacres of
September. . . .</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000345">I leave everything in a fearful muddle; there is no one who understands government. . . .</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000346">They are all my brothers Cain.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000347">Brissot would have had me guillotined like Robespierre. . .</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000348">I had a spy who never left me. . . .</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000349">The f. . . . beasts, they will cry ‘Vive la Republique!’as they see me pass!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000350">In the end Danton resigned himself and faced his end with courage.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000351">A few moments before starting for the place of execution he summed up his philosophy of life in a characteristic sentence: ‘What matter if I die?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000352">I have well enjoyed myself in the Revolution; I have spent well, caroused well, caressed many women; let us sleep!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000353">(<i>Qu’importe si je meurs?</i></span><i> <span class="fragm" id="f000354">J’ai bien joui dans la Révolution, j’ai bien dépensé, bien ribotté, bien caressé des filles; allons dormer!</span></i>)” As the three scarlet tumbrils made their way along the Rue
Saint-Honoré serried rows of spectators watched them pass in silence; this time they did not rejoice, but neither did they dare to express disapproval. <span class="fragm" id="f000355">Camille
Desmoulins, the one-time “procurer of the lantern,” displayed pitiable weakness now that his own turn had come.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000356">In his despair he had so tom his clothes that his body was bare almost to the waist; all the way he talked feverishly to his companions, laughing convulsively the while like one demented.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000357">Only a year ago, in sending the Girondins to their doom, Camille had said confidently, “We have the people with us!” now, like every demagogue in turn, he appealed vainly to the people’s pity.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000358">At one moment overcome with frenzy, Camille, struggling madly, tearing at his clothes, shrieked out to them, “People, it is your servants who are being sacrificed!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000359">It is I who in 1789 called you to arms!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000360">It is I who uttered the first cry of liberty!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000361">My crime, my only crime, is to have shed tears!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000362">But the mob, always cruel to those who showed fear, responded only with jeers and insults.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000363">At this Danton, rolling his enormous round head contemptuously, said with a derisive smile to Camille, “Be quiet, and leave alone that vile <i>canaille</i>!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000364">At the last moment the thought of his young wife, whom, voluptuary though he was, he loved sincerely, wrung from Danton one cry of agony, “My beloved, I shall see you no more!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000365">Then pulling himself together, “Come, Danton, no weakness!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000366">Turning to the executioner he said, “Show my head to the people, it is worth it!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000367">And amidst cries of “Vive la Republique!” that terrible head was held aloft.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000368">The execution of Danton has been frequently described as the vengeance of Robespierre on a formidable rival.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000369">Undoubtedly Robespierre’s devouring envy was aroused by Danton’s powerful oratory, as formerly it had been aroused by the eloquence of the Girondins.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000370">At the same time it must be admitted that the Dantonistes’ philosophy of life was incompatible with the schemes of Robespierre and St. Just.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000371">Long after the death of the Dantonistes
Fievee relates that he asked Voulland, a member of the Comité de Surete
Generate and the <i>intime</i> of Robespierre, why the destruction of this party had been found necessary, to which Voulland replied that as long as the
Orléans faction prevailed, that is to say, “the deputies who mingled pleasures, luxury, and cupidity with proscriptions,” it was impossible to restore order.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000372">“Heaven knows what would have become of France in their hands!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000373">As to Camille
Desmoulins, Voulland added, “who had ranged himself on their side as a dupe rather than as an accomplice, could we save him whilst attacking Danton, the most dangerous of all Orléanistes, and Fabre d’Églantine, even more immoral than Danton?”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000374">It is not therefore, as certain historians would have us believe, because the Dantonistes had become humane and “moderate” that their fall was inevitable, but because they were Orléanistes, because they were voluptuaries and reactionaries—reactionaries in the true sense of the word; that is to say, men who wished to maintain the easy morals and the inequalities of the Old Regime in an aggravated form.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000375">So whilst there can be no excuse for their murder—and their trial was really nothing but judicial murder—it was obviously impossible for Robespierre to realize his plan of an austere
Republic, founded on absolute equality, as long as they remained in power.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h2><span class="fragm" id="f000376">THE GREAT TERROR</span> </h2>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000377">The question has frequently been asked why, after the death of the Dantonistes, Robespierre did not immediately embark on his schemes of reconstruction.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000378">Why should the final overthrow of his most formidable rivals have proved the signal for a still more rigorous application of the Terror?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000379">But when we have once grasped the theory on which the Terror was founded, the problem seems easier of solution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000380">For in the spring of 1794 the process of depopulating Paris had only just begun, and to the triumvirate it seemed more than ever necessary to continue the operation with unremitting energy if a harmonious
Socialist State was to result.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000381">In order to understand this necessity to its full extent we must realize something of the state of Paris under the reign of Robespierre and his allies.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000382">The truth is, then, that the populace whom these demagogues had made all-powerful had now become their terror; no Sultan was ever watched more anxiously by trembling “wazirs” than was the Sovereign People by its courtiers of 1794.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000383">With a view to guarding against any ebullitions of popular feeling, agents were employed by them to go about the city and study the moods of the people—“listeners” and “observers” who stood beside the groups at the street corners, amongst the women in the markets and in the queues at the shop doors, or who mingled with the crowds watching the victims going to the guillotine.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000384">Everything the observers noticed; everything the listeners overheard; expressions of approval or murmurs of dissatisfaction at the existing regime, smiles, frowns, angry exclamations, or derisive laughter—all these were set down and conveyed verbatim to the revolutionary committees in detailed daily reports.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000385">These documents, which have been published both by
Schmidt and Dauban, afford us the minutest insight into the mind of Paris at this moment, and at the same time throw a curious light on the mentality of the demagogues.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000386">The fact that they should have held this intricate system of espionage to be necessary shows how profoundly they distrusted the people they professed to worship, and how keenly they realized the insecurity of their own position.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000387">Nor were such fears groundless, for the result of all these observations was to reveal that beneath the apparent submission of the people there lay a deep undercurrent of discontent.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000388">This perhaps was not altogether surprising, for the famine was now worse than ever.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000389">All over France the in habitants of the towns had been put on rations of the meagrest description; in the country districts, where even these were not obtainable, the unhappy peasants staved off the pangs of hunger with grass and acorns.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000390">The queues at the shop doors had grown steadily longer; from three or four o’clock in the morning rows of starving men and women stood in the cold and rain, or, sinking from exhaustion, lay in heaps upon the pavement.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000391">The law of the “maximum,” by which a fixed price was set on all the necessaries of life, far from easing the situation as had been promised, immensely complicated it.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000392">The fishermen refused to put out to sea, the millers concealed their grain rather than sell it at a loss, the shopkeepers reserved their goods for favoured customers or disposed of them secretly at prices above the maximum to those who could afford to pay.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000393">The people, enraged by these manoeuvres, and faithful to Marat’s teachings, continued to waylay the peasants bringing supplies into the city, and pillaged the carts containing eggs, butter, or poultry.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000394">“Some paid; the others carried off the things without paying.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000395">The peasants in despair swore they would bring nothing more to Paris.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000396">Besides the want of food, the want of employment was still acute; bands of workmen gathered at the street comers complaining of the times.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000397">“How can you expect us to work when all the rich people, whether patriots or not, are imprisoned?”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000398">Beggars, old men, women and children besieged passers-by for alms.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000399">Meanwhile the men who were still employed perpetually demanded higher pay; the masons and carpenters put up their prices every ten days, threatening not to work unless their demands were acceded to.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000400">“Everybody,” writes a government agent, “cries out against the tyranny of the workmen.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000401">But even when the money they claimed had been paid they were not contented, for often they could buy nothing with it.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000402">What was the good of earning 100 sols a day instead of 20 sols when neither bread nor meat, candles or firing were to be had?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000403">Moreover, owing to the bankruptcy of the
State, the <i>assignats</i> or paper money they received had only a fictitious value.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000404">“A cab fare,” relates Mercier, “cost 600 livres; that is to say, 10 livres a minute.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000405">A private person going home in the evening said to the cabman, ‘How much?’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000406">‘6000 livres.’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000407">He pulled out his pocket-book and paid.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000408">Every one was rich in imagination; they were unhappy only when they were disillusioned.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000409">The people were perpetually being disillusioned.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000410">This beautiful reign of equality which had been promised them had brought them nothing but misery; yet they were continually assured that when a particular political faction had been overthrown all would be well, and the famine would miraculously disappear.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000411">Once it had been “the Court and aristocracy” who had monopolized the com, but Court and aristocracy were long since swept away, and still the grain was not forthcoming; then it was against the Girondins that the same charge had been brought, but the Girondins too were gone, and still the scarcity continued; now the Hébertistes, to whom it had likewise been attributed, had followed the Girondins, yet the people were hungrier than ever.</span>
</p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000412">Nothing had happened as they expected.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000413">Wealth still mocked at poverty, and those in power still drank and feasted whilst the struggling thousands starved.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000414">For at the butchers' shops, where the people waited from early dawn for a miserable scrap of meat, the best joints were reserved for the members of the revolutionary committees and their friends.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000415">The restaurants too, where the “representatives of the people” forgathered, were still lavishly supplied with excellent food, as many as three or four meat courses being served at one meal.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000416">It is hardly surprising, then, if the people grew indignant and cried out that, whilst “fathers of families could not put the pot on the fire in their homes when their wives were sick,” and “honest citizens were eating only bread and potatoes, the wealthier citizens were making up parties for the restaurants. ...</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000417">It is only well-off people,” they said, “who dine at restaurants, and they go there to regale themselves with light women whilst the poor <i>sans-culottes</i> eat bread.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000418">Exasperated by their sufferings, the people cast about for remedies which varied according to the temperament of the malcontents; thus, whilst some cried “Vive l’ancien Regime!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000419"><i>then</i> we had abundance of everything!” others declared that things would go no better unless more victims were executed, and, nodding their heads in the direction of the guillotine, added, “It is only that saint there who can save us!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000420">The fact is that the people of Paris were now neither
Royalist nor Republican, neither for their present rulers or against them; their faith in all government had been shaken to its foundations.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000421">In consequence of seeing one faction after another led to the guillotine, they had come to regard this spectacle as the natural ending to a political career: “All these rascals of deputies will pass that way!” they cried out in the popular assemblies.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000422">A government agent, adopting an admirable simile, remarks: “The mass of the nation is a bear, and the political parties working it are turbulent monkeys who have climbed up and are playing on its back.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000423">The question for every demagogue was thus, “Will the bear rise and throw us off?”</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000424">And, haunted by this apprehension, they played on in fear and trembling, now patting the great beast into good-humour, now terrorizing it into submission.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000425">One thing was certain, the people were not to be depended on to support any faction or government consistently; the needs of the moment were their only law.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000426">These same women who would fight each other to the death for a few ounces of butter, and tear provisions furiously from the market-carts, would not raise a finger to save their idols from destruction—never once attempted to drag a victim—even one of their own kind—from his seat in the tumbril on the way to the guillotine.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000427">How was it possible to make a “nation of gods” out of such elements?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000428">Where amidst all this sea of human passions was the “virtue,” the austerity, the “civism” necessary to the ideal Republic to be found?</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000429">Inevitably, therefore, the people of Paris must be subjected to the same process as the people in the provinces before the work of reconstruction could begin.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000430">It was thus that in April of 1794 Robespierre and his colleagues, now in sole possession of the field, set to work with redoubled energy on their great scheme—the depopulation of Paris.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000431">From this moment the role of the people ceased entirely; except as a hired and often recalcitrant <i>claque</i>, even the populace took no part in the scenes of bloodshed that followed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000432">Once the people had been the tools of the demagogues, carrying out their vengeances; now the people’s own turn had come—as it must come in every revolution that does not stop half-way-—and they had become the victims.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000433">No longer was the force of the people turned against themselves—demagogy had abandoned “jiu-jitsu” and assumed the bludgeon.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000434">The Reign of Terror was absolute despotism.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000435">“One must have seen,” says Frenilly, “as I saw in 1793 and
1794, in the country and in the towns—which history will never tell—the entire population, good and simple peasants, tradesmen, artisans and owners of property, all trembling beneath the hauteur of a few lawyers formed into a
Popular Society.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000436">Never did vassals submit more humbly to vexations; never did barons exercise them with more arrogance.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000437">The people were no longer merely paralysed, but absolutely crushed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000438">Every vestige of liberty accorded by the first two Assemblies under Louis XVI—personal liberty, liberty of the press, religious liberty, the sacredness of property—were utterly destroyed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000439">Even speech was no longer free—a word sufficed to send one to the scaffold.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000440">“The worst thing under the rule of Robespierre,” old men used to say long afterwards, “was that in the morning one could never be sure of sleeping in one’s bed that night.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000441">Immediately after the death of the Dantonistes the condemnations passed by the Revolutionary Tribunal increased in number; during the preceding month of Ventose the guillotine had claimed only 116 victims; in
Germinal, on the 16th day of which the Dantonistes perished, the figure rose to
155, and in the following month of Floréal to no less than 354.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000442">These were still taken principally from amongst the Royalists, aristocrats, or bourgeois—on the 20th of April twenty-five Parliamentarians; on the 3rd of May the Grenadiers des Filles-St. Thomas, who had remained loyal to the King at the siege of the Tuileries; on the 8th of May twenty-eight farmer-generals; on the
10th of May Madame Elizabeth and a number of aristocrats, both men and women.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000443">It was not until Robespierre had succeeded in obtaining the decree known as the
“Loi du 22 Prairial” (the 10th of June) that the great indiscriminate butcheries began.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000444">By this infamous law victims summoned before the
Revolutionary Tribunal were denied all rights of defence; no advocates were to be allowed, no witnesses called, and the penalty imposed in all cases was to be death.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000445">The “Loi du 22 Prairial” was undoubtedly Robespierre’s bid for absolute power.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000446">Two days earlier he had presided at the “Feast of the
Supreme Being,” where he had thrown off his disguise of austerity and appeared before the people curled and powdered, in his pale-blue coat and nankin breeches, holding in his hands an enormous bouquet of flowers and wheat-ears.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000447">In order to make his entry more impressive, he had kept the immense crowd waiting for half-an-hour before he made his appearance, and as a storm of applause greeted his arrival a glow of triumph overspread the sallow countenance of the Incorruptible.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000448">At this moment, writes one who looked on, “he believed himself to be King and God.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000449">The plaudits of the multitude mounted to his head like wine, and it was under the influence of this intoxication that he ventured on his great coup—the passing of the law that was to place in his hands the power of life and death.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000450">Yet if it is to Robespierre that the system of the Terror in Paris must be mainly attributed, we should be mistaken in regarding him as the most sanguinary of the Terrorists.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000451">On the contrary, everything goes to prove that Robespierre and his principal ally, St. Just, did not love bloodshed for its own sake; they regarded it merely as a means to an end—the establishment of a harmonious democracy on the plan they had devised.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000452">But, however exalted may have been the ideal at which they aimed, it was obviously impossible for them to find idealists exclusively to co-operate with them or to execute their scheme, and they were therefore obliged to throw in their lot with a band of men so atrocious that by comparison they themselves seem almost humane.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000453">These men were to be found amongst their colleagues in the Comité de
Salut Public and their instruments in the Comité de Surete Générale and the
Revolutionary Tribunal.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000454">The Comité de Sûreté Générale had been created in 1789 by the National Assembly as a “committee of information,” and only took its later name on the 30th of May 1792.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000455">Although supposed to be subordinate to the Comité de Salut Public, and in accord with it, the Comité de Sûreté Générale had in reality become its rival, and each committee was in turn divided into rival factions.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000456">These factions, and the mysterious names they bore, have been described by S6nart, and when tabulated in the following manner throw a strange light on the workings of the Terror:</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000457"><u><span>Comité de
Salut Public</span></u></span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000458"><i>Les Gens de la Haute Main:</i> Robespierre, Couthon, St. Just</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000459"><i>Les Gens Revolutionaires:</i> Barére, Billaud, Collot</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000460"><i>Les Gens d’Examen:</i> Carnot, Prieur, Lindet</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000461"><u><span>Comité de
Sûreté Générale</span></u></span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000462"><i>Les Gens d’Exp</i>é<i>dition:</i> Vadier, Voulland, Amar, Jagot, Louis du Bas Rhin</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000463"><i>Les Ecouteurs:</i> David, Lebas</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000464"><i>Les Gens de Contre-poids:</i> Moise Bayle, Lavicomterie, Elie Lacoste, Dubarran</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000465">By means of this table the really sanguinary authors of the
Terror can be seen at a glance; these were the “Gens Revolutionnaires” of the first committee, and the “Gens d’Expédition” of the second.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000466">For innate ferocity, for real bloodthirstiness—bloodthirstiness without any ultimate purpose—we must look, not to the triumvirate formed by Robespierre, Couthon, and St. Just, but to that infamous trio who afterwards overthrew them—Barére de
Vieuzac, Billaud-Varenne, and Collot d’Herbois.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000467">Was it not Billaud who had presided at the massacres in the prisons, and urged the assassins on to violence?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000468">Was it not Collot who had declared these same massacres of September to be the “Credo” of liberty, and who, as the ally of Chalier, had organized the atrocities that took place at Lyon?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000469">And it was Barére, that miserable
“chameleon,” now Feuillant, now Jacobin, now aristocrat, now revolutionary, “atheist in the evening, deist in the morning,” who in one atrocious phrase epitomized the plan of depopulation into which no one had entered more heartily than he.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000470">One day, Vilate relates, Barcire, looking out of a window in the
Tuileries towards the city, said, “Paris is too large; it is to the Republic, by means of its monstrous population, what a violent rush of blood is to the heart of a man—a suffocation that withers the other organs and leads to death.”</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000471">And to Dupin he added: “Do you know, Dupin, that the idea of Nero, when he set fire to Rome in order to have the pleasure of re-building it, was a really revolutionary idea?”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000472">The former phrase became current coin amongst the
Terrorists; it was continually on their lips, says Mercier, and they would observe that, in order to counteract this unhealthy rush of blood to the heart, one should have recourse to “phlebotomy.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000473">At his pleasure-house of Clichy, Barére met twice a decade with his allies, the “Gens d’Expédition” of the Comité de Surete Generate, to plan fresh <i>fournées</i> for the guillotine.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000474">It was these monsters—Vadier, Voulland, Amar, Jagot, Louis du Bas Rhin, names long since forgotten, yet in their day names of dread and horror—who lent to the Terror that spirit of ghoulish ferocity that makes the history of the period unique in the annals of mankind.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000475">This hideous band that Sénart describes with fearful realism in his <i>Memoires</i> reminds one of nothing so much as a pack of jackals breaking the stillness of a Himalayan night with their dreary howling after blood.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000476">Thus Sénart relates:</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000477">“There had been one evening a great number of people guillotined; Louis du Bas Rhin said:</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000478">‘It is going well; the baskets are filling.’</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000479">‘Then,’ answered Voulland, ‘let us make a provision of game. . . .’</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000480">Vadier said to Voulland: ‘I saw you on the Place de la Revolution near the guillotine.’</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000481">‘I went to laugh at the faces those rascals make at the window.’</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000482">‘Ho!’ said Vadier, ‘it is a funny passage—the little window.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000483">They give a good sneeze into the sack.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000484">It amuses me, I have taken quite a liking for it.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000485">I often go there.’</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000486">‘Go to-morrow,’ resumed Amar, ‘there will be a great show;
I was at the Tribunal to-day.’</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000487">‘Let us go there,’ said Vadier.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000488">‘I’ll go for certain,’ retorted Voulland.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000489">Sénart declares that during this conversation he pinched himself to make sure he was not dreaming; he felt as if he were between a tiger, a panther, and a bear.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000490">Now it is remarkable that none of Robespierre’s many enemies ever attributed to him sentiments of this atrocious kind, though had they done so they would have been readily believed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000491">Yet amongst all the witnesses who afterwards came forward at the trial of Fouquier Tinville to testify to the system of the Terror, and Robespierre’s share in it, none asserted that he had appeared to take delight in the sufferings of his victims or that he had even assisted at the spectacle of the guillotine.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000492">Indeed, all evidence goes to show that Robespierre took the first opportunity to disassociate himself from the men he had set in motion; and it was thus that five days after the passing of the “Loi du 22 Prairial” he ceased to attend the meetings of the Comité de
Salut Public.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000493">But to argue from this, as Robespierre’s panegyrists have done, that he now wished to arrest the course of the Terror is quite another matter.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000494">No, Robespierre did not wish to arrest the Terror—of this there can be no possible doubt.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000495">Was not the law that inaugurated those last terrible six weeks of his own making?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000496">And if he no longer took part in the discussions of the
Comité de Salut Public, were not the sanguinary Commune and the police of Paris entirely under his control?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000497">If, therefore, Robespierre withdrew from the committee, it was either because he disapproved the manner in which his more ferocious colleagues carried out the system of the Terror, or, more probably, because he had begun to see in Billaud, Collot, and Barére a faction that threatened not only his supremacy but his life.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000498">After the “Loi du 22 Prairial,” says Vilate, “Robespierre became more sombre, his scowling air repelled everyone, he talked only of assassination, again of assassination, always of assassination.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000499">He was afraid that his shadow would assassinate him.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000500">Already he believed that an attempt had been made to murder him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000501">In the evening of the 25th of May Cecile Renault, the daughter of a small stationer, had entered the gloomy courtyard of the carpenter’s house in the Rue
Saint-Honoré and asked to see Robespierre.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000502">When told that he was out she showed temper and, evidently disbelieving the assertion, answered that a public functionary should be willing to receive all those who asked to see him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000503">On these words she was led to the Comité de Sûreté Générale, and, by way of making her condemnation absolutely certain, observed that “under the Old Regime when one presented oneself to the King one was allowed to enter at once.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000504">“Then would you rather have a king?” they asked her, and she answered boldly, “I would shed all my blood to have one. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000505">That is my opinion; you are only tyrants.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000506">She had gone to Robespierre, she told the Committee, “in order to see what a tyrant was like.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000507">They found on her two little penknives, and in a basket she had left at a lemonade-seller’s near-by a change of linen, which she explained she had brought with her, as she expected to be sent to prison and thence to the scaffold.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000508">Before the Revolutionary Tribunal she declared that she had not intended to kill Robespierre, but persisted in expressing her devotion to
Louis XVI: “I said I wept for our good King, yes, I said it, and I wish he were still living.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000509">Are you not five hundred kings, and all more insolent and more despotic than the one you killed?”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000510">This, of course, sealed the fate of Cecile Renault, and since on the same day a man named Amiral had really attempted to shoot Collot d’Herbois, the revolutionary committees seized the opportunity to proclaim that a “vast conspiracy” had been discovered.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000511">On the proposal of Louis du Bas Rhin of the Comité de Sûreté
Générale, they further decided to represent this conspiracy as originating in
England.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000512">Once again it was Pitt—solemnly declared by the Convention ten months earlier to be “the enemy of the human race”—who had instigated the papermaker’s daughter to assassinate Robespierre.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000513">This ludicrous fable offered Barére an occasion to pour forth furious diatribes against the English— “that treacherous and ferocious people, a slave at home, a despot on the Continent, and a pirate at sea”; at the same time it afforded Robespierre a pretext for sending an enormous batch of victims to the guillotine.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000514">Amongst these were included, not only Cecile Renault’s father, the papermaker, her young brother, and an aunt who had been a nun, but all kinds of men and women, some belonging to the nobility, some to the people—the heretofore Prince of Rohan-Rochefort, the beautiful Emilie de Sartines, and her mother, Madame de Sainte-Amaranthe, four administrators of police, a grocer, a lemonadeseller, a concierge, and two domestic servants—sixty-one in all.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000515">The most pathetic of these conspirators was a little seamstress of seventeen, known as “la petite Nicholle,” too poor even to afford herself a bedstead, and when Sénart, secretary to the Comité de Sûreté Générale, sought her in her attic on the seventh floor, he found her lying on a straw mattress laid upon the boards.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000516">“Voulland,” says Sénart, “wished for her death, because he said she took food to the woman Grandmaison”—an actress included in the same
<i>fournée</i>—“‘and for that reason,’ said the hypocrite Louis du Bas Rhin, ‘she will go with her.’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000517">I was assured of her innocence. . .”</span></p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000518">It was also Louis du Bas Rhin who proposed that, in order to make the procession more imposing, all the victims should be sent to the scaffold in the scarlet dress of assassins, “for,” said he, “small things lead to great ones, appearances create illusions, and it is by illusions that the people are led.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000519">At this Vadier, fearing that his prey was to be snatched from him and the whole affair to end in a vain parade, cried out, “But we must have reality, we must have blood!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000520">Louis du Bas Rhin answered reassuringly, “Poets represent the sage to us as sheltered by a wall of brass; let us raise a wall of heads between ourselves and the people.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000521">What despot, asks Sénart, had ever said, “Raise a wall of heads between myself and my subjects?”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000522">On the day of execution the jackals were there to watch the procession pass, and it was then that Voulland, turning to his companions, uttered his famous <i>bon mot</i>:
“Come, let us go to the high altar and see the celebration of the Red Mass.”</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000523">Fouquier, too, was determined not to miss the spectacle; from a window in the
Conciergerie he had watched the scarlet-clad figures ascending the tumbrils and, irritated by the sang-froid of Madame de Sainte-Amaranthe, exclaimed, “See how brazen they are!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000524">I must go and see them mount the scaffold, even if I have to miss my dinner!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000525">The calm invariably displayed by the victims was a source of continual annoyance to the jackals of the Comité de Sûreté Générale and their allies in the Revolutionary Tribunal.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000526">One evening as they met at their favourite tavern—Chretien, on the Place du Theatre Favart—to drink punch and liqueurs, to smoke and laugh over the executions, and boast of the way they invented accusations against innocent people, Renaudin, one of the most ferocious members of the Revolutionary Tribunal, referring to a certain victim, remarked, “There was nothing against him.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000527">“When there is nothing,” said Vilate, “one invents.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000528">“As for me,” said Foucault, “I find nobles everywhere, even amongst cobblers.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000529">Prieur then observed, “There is one thing that puts me in a temper, and that is the courage with which all these counter-revolutionaries go to their death.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000530">If I were in the place of the Public Accuser, I would have all the condemned people bled before their execution, so as to break down their insolent bearing.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000531">“Bravo, my friend,” cried Leroy, known under the sobriquet of “Dix Aout,” “I will undertake to speak of it to Fouquier!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000532">After the great <i>fournée</i> of the Chemises Rouges things moved faster, yet still not fast enough to satisfy the members of the two committees, and it was then decided to have recourse once more to the old device that had succeeded so admirably in September 1792, and to announce that vast conspiracies were being formed' in all the prisons.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000533">The pretext, which seems to have been concerted between Robespierre and Hermann, president of the
Revolutionary Tribunal, was, however, this time not so plausible, for the successes of the Republican armies made it impossible to represent the prisoners as a danger to the country through collusion with invading legions.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000534">In order, therefore, to give some colour to the story, an attempt was made by means of systematic ill-treatment—by taking from them all their possessions, feeding them abominably, and waking them up repeatedly in the night—to drive the prisoners to form some plan of revolt which could be called a conspiracy.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000535">But the unhappy captives bore all their sufferings with complete resignation; not the faintest shadow of a conspiracy could be detected in any of the prisons.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000536">Yet ha each prison in turn—Bicetre, the Luxembourg, the Carmes, Saint-Lazare, and La Force—it was announced that a conspiracy had been formed, and on this pretext people of all kinds, men and women, deaf, blind, or paralysed, were condemned to death <i>en masse</i>.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000537">Many of these conspirators, accused of having conferred together, met for the first time in the tumbrils on the way to execution.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000538">The hecatombs now became appalling.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000539">During the last six weeks before the fall of Robespierre, that is to say between the passing of the
“Loi du 22 Prairial” on June 10 and July 27, the period which constitutes “The
Great Terror,” no less than 1366 victims perished, and amongst these by far the largest proportion was taken from amongst either “the people” or the <i>petite bourgeoisie.</i> “One saw before this Tribunal of Blood,” it was said later in the trial of Fouquier Tinville, “labouring men who tilled the soil, whose rags hardly covered their nakedness, ascending the rows of seats (of the Tribunal), and being led to the scaffold for having in a moment of anger, or perhaps of drunkenness, made some observation, or for having, through want of education
(!), opposed the removal of their church bells.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000540">In order to swell the numbers of the condemned, poor people were dragged to Paris from all parts of France and butchered without any explanation being given them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000541">“Twenty women of Poitou,” writes an eye-witness, “poor peasants mostly, were assassinated all together.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000542">I see them still, those unhappy victims, lying out in the courtyard of the Conciergerie, overcome with fatigue after a long journey—sleeping on the paving-stones.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000543">Their glances, which betrayed no understanding of the fate that threatened them, resembled those of oxen herded together in the market-place, looking around them fixedly and without comprehension.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000544">They were all executed a few days after their arrival.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000545">At the moment of going to death, someone tore from the breast of one of these unfortunate women the child that she was nursing. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000546">Oh! cries of maternal anguish, how piercing you were, but you were in vain.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000547">Some of the women died in the cart and they guillotined the corpses.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000548">In this case the victims were condemned all in a batch, without specific grounds of accusations being brought against them individually; where men and women of the people were condemned singly some trumped-up charge was usually forthcoming.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000549">The following entries taken at random from Wallon’s records of the Revolutionary Tribunal give an idea of the pretexts on which these poor creatures were done to death:</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000550">1.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000551">Francoise Bridier, widow Loreu, aged 72, domestic servant, accused of having hidden 12 ells of linen cloth required for the clothing of the volunteers.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000552">2.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000553">Anne Therese Raffe, widow Coquet, denounced by the citizen Folatre to whom she had wished to give a note of 50 livres which he did not need.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000554">3.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000555">Germaine Quetier, the wife of Charbonnier, who said that she wanted a <i>rouet</i> (spinning-wheel), which she pronounced like “roi.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000556">But it must be admitted that some of the victims brought their fate on themselves.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000557">“Aristocracy” was still rampant amongst certain classes of the people, and nothing could persuade them to keep silent.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000558">Thus
Madame Blanchet, the old servant of the Abbé de Salamon—she who had turned over the corpses in the courtyard of the Abbaye in her search for her master during the massacres of September—still continued to speak her mind very freely.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000559">Blanchet was therefore imprisoned at the “Anglaises,” where she found herself amongst a number of <i>ci-devants</i> who had sympathized with the Revolution.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000560">One of these ladies, the Duchesse d’Anville la Rochefoucauld, taunted Blanchet, saying, “Citizeness Blanchet, you will be guillotined like us!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000561">“I know that well,” Blanchet answered, “but there is a difference between us.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000562">I shall die for your cause, which you yourself have abandoned, and you, you will die for having embraced the cause of the patriots. ...</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000563">It will be much more degrading to perish thus. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000564">No one will be sorry for you, but for me all honourable people who learn of my sad fate will weep. ...</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000565">I have always been an aristocrat myself, and you, you were always the friend of that contemptible Condorcet about whom I could tell you fine things!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000566">But it was not only the “respectable poor” like Blanchet who entertained aristocratic sentiments.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000567">Some of the disreputable women of the people were violently Royalist.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000568">The Comtesse de Bohm has described a number of these poor creatures, mostly street criers, who were her fellow-prisoners at the Conciergerie, and “carried Royalism to excess.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000569">When, as frequently happened, they became noisily drunk, “their songs, their toasts, were constantly intermingled with cries of ‘Vive le Roi!’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000570">” “These resounding exclamations,” writes Madame de Bohm, “annoyed the gaolers, who, unable to make them keep silence, daily threatened and struck these drunken women.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000571">This bold, free, and exalted way of showing one’s feelings, of preferring death to constraint, indicates a certain greatness of soul, a savage independence which contrasted strangely with the baseness, the coarseness, and the obscene habits of my neighbours. ...</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000572">I sometimes represented to them the dangers they were incurring.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000573">‘Oh well, my girl, we shall be guillotined!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000574">One can only die once!’</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000575">The turnkeys, tired of these vociferations, denounced them; and after being judged and condemned they mounted the scaffold, crying deafeningly, ‘Vive le
Roi!’</span> ” </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000576">The temptation to commit suicide by uttering this fatal cry proved irresistible to certain women; thus Marie Corrie, a young laundress of twenty-three, from sheer “gaiety of heart” opened her window and shouted loudly, “Vive le Roi!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000577">Before the Revolutionary Tribunal she frankly admitted the offence, declaring that she would always cry “Vive le Roi!” and Vive Louis
XVII!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000578">The guillotine silenced her at last.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000579">It seems, indeed, that throughout this fearful period of the Terror some mysterious spirit of exaltation was abroad; the utter uncertainty in which one lived, the breathless suspense that kept the nerves at concert pitch, the bridging over of the chasm that divides life from death effected by the daily spectacle of those slow-moving “hearses of the living” conveying youth and age, virility and beauty, to the other world, even the tropical heat of the weather, all combined to produce an abnormal state of mind which drove people of ardent imaginations to throw their lives recklessly away.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000580">But whatever the cause, the courage displayed by the women of all classes during the Reign of Terror must eternally remain one of the most glorious episodes in the history of France.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000581">Amongst the hundreds that perished one alone, poor old Madame du Barry, showed weakness; all the rest, without exception, faced the scaffold with unfaltering courage.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000582">In the women of the aristocratic classes this heroism is the less surprising, for they were trained from infancy to hide their feelings and to live up to their traditions.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000583">To these bearers of great names, dying for a cause that was their own, the Terror must have appeared as a mighty drama in which each one felt herself called to play her part worthily, knowing full well that every word, every smile or glance or gesture would be noticed and recorded, her last words handed down from generation to generation, the lock of hair she gave preserved as a sacred relic amongst her descendants.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000584">But for the women of the people, where was the incentive to courage?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000585">To these poor souls, suddenly and roughly hurried out of life for no apparent reason, the Terror can have presented nothing in the least dramatic—merely a black horror they could not understand.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000586">The Revolution, they were told, was for the good of the people; yet were they not the people?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000587">Surely to be butchered in the name of democracy was a thousand times more maddening than to fall a victim to the tyranny of the Old Regime!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000588">It cannot be too often repeated—the people were the chief sufferers in the Terror.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000589">Even in the prisons the aristocrats fared better than they.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000590">For there, as everywhere else during the reign of equality, money could buy alleviations, and the wealthier prisoners were able, by the payment of four or five livres a day, to secure cells and pallet-beds, wretched enough in truth, yet infinitely to be preferred to the dreadful <i>Souriciére</i> or “Mouse-Trap” of the Conciergerie, where the unhappy members of the people were flung upon filthy straw to be devoured by rats and poisoned with pestilential odours.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000591">Why did the people submit to this regime?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000592">How, in the words of Vilate, are we to understand “the blind docility of the most enlightened of nations in allowing itself to be taken piecemeal and butchered <i>en masse</i> like a stupid herd led to the shambles?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000593">History will ask this question.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000594">The answer is surely that the despotism of the demagogues was organized, whilst the people were composed of solitary units that could not coalesce.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000595">To form an effectual opposition it would have been necessary to meet in consultation, to draw up some plan of campaign, and any such attempts would have been instantly crushed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000596">The people, therefore, felt themselves helpless; no one dared to break line, to take the first step, uncertain whether he would get a backing from his fellows or whether those very men who seemed most eager to rebel would not at the last moment be stricken with panic and betray their allies.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000597">Fear, indeed, held all hearts in its grip.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000598"><i>The
Terrorists themselves were terrorized</i>.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000599">They lived in dread now less of the people than of each other.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000600">The revolutionary committees were divided against themselves.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000601">Robespierre had his spies in the Comit6 de Suret6 G6n6rale; meanwhile Vadier of this committee employed an agent to shadow Robespierre.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000602">From this mutual distrust and suspicion arose much of the frenzy that characterized the Terror; each man and each faction strove to outdo the other—“to kill in order not to be killed” became the plan of one and all.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000603">Meanwhile the members of the Revolutionary Tribunal were driven onwards by the same haunting terror; Fouquier Tinville himself trembled perpetually lest his zeal should be deemed unsufficing.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000604">This was afterwards clearly proved at his trial, when all the workings of the Terror were laid bare.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000605">Fouquier, it then transpired, was in the habit of going regularly every night during the time that he occupied the post of Public
Accuser to receive his orders first from the Comité de Salut Public, then from the Comité de Sûreté Générale.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000606">It was then that the fate of the prisoners was decided and the <i>fournée</i> of the morrow arranged, after which Fouquier, armed with his lists, returned to the Conciergerie at one o’clock in the morning, or even later.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000607">Against these decisions of the committees there was no appeal: “Do you not know,” Fouquier said to Sénart, “that when the Comité de
Salut Public has decided on the death of anyone, patriot or aristocrat, no matter, he has got to go?”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000608">That Fouquier knew exactly the number of the condemned <i>before they were brought to trial was proved conclusively</i>.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000609">One day, Sénart related, he was waiting in an ante-chamber outside Fouquier’s room at the
Conciergerie, when one of the executioner’s employes arrived, and Fouquier at this moment making his appearance the man said to him, I have come, citizen, to ask you how many carts are wanted.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000610">Fouquier counting on his fingers murmured, ‘‘Eight—ten—twelve eighteen twenty-four—thirty—there will be thirty heads to-day.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000611">Sénart thereupon said to Fouquier, “What? the trial has not yet begun, and you know beforehand the number of heads?”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000612">“Bah! bah!” answered Fouquier, “I know what I am about, and besides, sir, that is none of your business.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000613">I know how to silence the ‘moderates.’</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000614">” And he went off into his office saying suavely, “Au revoir, my fine gentleman!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000615">Fouquier at his trial, confronted with this incident, stammered out that the witness could not be relied on; but whether Sénart is to be absolutely believed or not, the undeniable fact remains that the tumbrils arrived regularly in the courtyard of the Conciergerie every morning between nine and ten o’clock, before the trial began, and were found after it had ended to provide precisely the accommodation required.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000616">This detail, moreover, corresponds exactly with Fouquier’s own repeated statement that he was merely “a cog in the wheel of the revolutionary machine,” that he was perpetually goaded on to greater activity by the committees, threatened with dire consequences if he failed to provide a sufficient number of heads.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000617">But that Fouquier was, as he also declared, an <i>unwilling</i> instrument in the hands of the committees it is impossible to believe; overwhelming evidence goes to prove that, like his allies the jackals of the
Comité de Surety Generale, Fouquier warmed to the work and, once put on the scent, followed it up with all the fury of a beast of prey.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000618">“Heads are fading like tiles,” he said exultingly to Heron, who answered him, “Oh, things will go still better—do not worry!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000619">Sometimes during the so-called trials Fouquier would enliven the proceedings with jests; thus when a woman, paralysed even to her tongue, appeared before the Tribunal, he observed gaily, ‘‘It is not her tongue, but her head we need.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000620">Yet it seems that there were moments when Fouquier, like
Charles IX on his death-bed, was overcome with horror at the thought of the innocent blood he had shed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000621">One night as he passed over the Pont Neuf with Sénart he looked down at the Seine and cried incontrollably, “Ah, how red it is!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000622">How red!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000623">Then turning to Sénart he said, “I live unquietly; I am tormented by the shades of those whom I have had guillotined—yet they had to die; the political system required it.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000624">Sénart took this opportunity to ask him why he condemned victims without proof instead of making inquiries, to which Fouquier replied, “That would be the way to get myself guillotined.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000625">Spurred on by this fear Fouquier redoubled his activities.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000626">Often after his interviews with the committees he would go into the tap-room of the Conciergerie to nerve himself for his fearful task with copious draughts of beer.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000627">It was then that he confided to his colleagues of the Revolutionary
Tribunal the instructions he had received for further <i>fournées</i>: “Things are not going fast enough. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000628">We must have 200 to 250 heads a decade; the
Government wishes it.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000629">Then when this figure had been achieved—exceeded—“We are not keeping up the pace. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000630">The last decade was not bad, but this one must go to 400 or 450. ...</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000631"><i>Il faut que cela aille</i>.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000632">And it <i>went</i>—with fearful rapidity.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000633">During the month of Messidor the number of victims had risen to 796; in the first nine days of
Thermidor alone it reached no less than 342.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000634">At this rate Fouquier’s 450 a decade would speedily be attained.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000635">Plans, indeed, had been made on a far larger scale; the size of the guillotines was to be increased so that four heads could be severed at a blow; an amphitheatre capable of containing 150 victims was to be erected at the Revolutionary Tribunal, and of this number each <i>fournée</i> for the guillotine was to be composed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000636">Already an immense <i>sangueduct</i> had been constructed in the Place Saint-Antoine, to which the guillotine had been removed on the 21st of Prairial, in order to carry away the torrents of blood that flowed from the scaffold, and an operation of the same kind was in progress at the Barriere du Trone, which had now become the place of execution.</span>
</p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000637">For as a spectacle the guillotine had long since lost its popularity; none but the <i>tricoteuses</i>, the hired “furies of the guillotine,” now applauded the executions; even the populace of Paris were sickened with the sight of bloodshed.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000638">Directly after the passing of the “Loi du 22 Prairial” the inhabitants of the Rue Saint-Honore petitioned for the removal of the guillotine from the Place de la Revolution near-by, for not only had the spectacle of the tumbrils daily passing under their windows become intolerable to the dwellers in this street, but the whole neighbourhood had become infected with the odour of carnage—the very oxen drawing country-carts refused to pass over the blood-soaked soil of the Place de la Revolution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000639">Accordingly the scaffold had been erected in the Place Saint-Antoine, but Saint-Antoine too had complained of its propinquity, and again it was found necessary to remove the instrument of death—decidedly La Sainte-Guillotine had lost favour with the public.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000640">Sanson, the executioner, himself was growing weary, and declared that “the immense and unremitting work” to which he and his aides were subjected was enough “to lay low the most robust of men,” consequently he now desired to end his term of service.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000641">At the Conciergerie, too, the officials were beginning to find the strain unendurable; one entering the office cried out to his comrades, “It is finished, no one is being judged any longer; we shall all go the same way, we are all lost!” and a porter of the prison, named Blanchard, bursting into tears, declared that he could bear it no longer, that he “was not the sort to occupy such a post, and that it made him ill.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000642">Everywhere throughout the city the same sense of horror prevailed; the Palais Royal, once the hotbed of revolution, was silent and deserted—the courtesans that had filled its arcades had retired into hiding, the taverns were empty, the booksellers displayed no pamphlets; people moved fearfully about the streets, afraid to speak, to smile, even to whisper.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000643">In a word, Paris was once more on the verge of a <i>crise de nerfs</i>.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000644">As usual, at nearly every great crisis of the Revolution, the weather was hot to suffocation.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000645">From the 4th of Thermidor the temperature rose steadily until by the 8th Paris had become a furnace—men and animals dropped dead from the heat.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000646">So physically and morally the storm gathered, then burst with a mighty thunderclap over the affrighted city on that momentous day—the Neuf Thermidor.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h2><span class="fragm" id="f000647">LE NEUF THERMIDOR</span> </h2>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000648">Ever since the Feast of the Supreme Being Robespierre had understood that the time was approaching when he must engage in a life-and-death struggle with his rivals of the Comité de Salut Public, and it was in preparation for this contingency that, after ceasing to frequent the meetings of the committee, he allied himself more closely with the Commune and the Jacobin Club.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000649">By this means he had succeeded in organizing a formidable opposition, and it seems probable that he had planned a rising for the 10th of
Thermidor, by which the revolutionary committees were to be overthrown and the triumvirate of Robespierre, Couthon, and St. Just left in sole possession of the field.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000650">On the 8th of Thermidor (the 26th of July) Robespierre judged that the moment had come to open the campaign against his enemies.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000651">Ascending the tribune of the Convention he embarked on a denunciation of the two revolutionary committees—the Comité de Sûreté Générale must be purged and subordinated to the Comité de Salut Public; the latter committee must likewise submit to purgation, the traitors must be punished.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000652">In other words, both committees were to be entirely subordinated to that virtuous and incorruptible trio—Robespierre, Couthon, and St. Just.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000653">The rival faction, instantly taking up the gauntlet, retorted with accusations against the Incorruptible.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000654">“One man only,” cried Cambon, “paralyses the will of the Convention—that man is
Robespierre!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000655">Robespierre, undismayed, went on after the sitting of the
Convention to the Jacobin Club and delivered a further oration, this time openly attacking Billaud and Collot, who were present at the meeting and found themselves obliged to escape for their lives amidst the angry howls of the
Jacobins.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000656">Encouraged by this demonstration Robespierre retired peacefully to bed, whilst St. Just spent the night at the Comité de Salut Public, writing out the act of accusation which was to be brought against the opponents of the triumvirate on the morrow.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000657">The 9th of Thermidor dawned sultry and lowering—no sun, and a sky of molten lead.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000658">But Robespierre and St. Just appeared at the Convention dressed as for a gala—Robespierre in the light-blue coat which had made its debut at the Feast of the Supreme Being, St. Just in a coat of chamois colour with an immense and carefully arranged cravat, white waistcoat, and breeches of delicate grey.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000659">The tribunes, still Robespierriste, greeted these apparitions with frenzied applause.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000660">Then St. Just ascended the tribune to deliver his speech of indictment, and once again reverted to the surgical simile which ever since the massacres of September had haunted the imagination of each revolutionary leader in turn: “I had been charged to make a report to you on the scandalous deviations that for some time have tormented public opinion, but the remedies I wished to propose to you were powerless to heal the ills of the Republic; a little balm will not suffice for so difficult a cure, we must carve down to the quick and cut off the gangrened limbs.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000661">At these words Tallien rose indignantly, and rushing at the tribune thrust aside St. Just: “I demand that the curtain be drawn aside!”</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000662">Tallien was quickly followed by Billaud-Varenne, crying out that a plot had been formed to murder the Convention: “The Convention will perish if it shows weakness!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000663">Then from all sides a tremendous uproar arose; members waved their hats, the audience shouted, “Long live the Convention!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000664">Long live the Comité de Salut Public!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000665">Collot, the president on this day, pealed his bell to restore order; Tallien flourished a dagger—sent him, it was said, by Teresia
Cabarrus, now in prison awaiting death—and threatened to pierce the heart of
“the new Cromwell” if the Convention did not decree his arrest; Robespierre dashed frantically at the tribune, but his voice was drowned in cries of “Down with the tyrant!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000666">Then one after another, Tallien, Freron, Billaud, Collot, Barére, once the servile accomplices of Robespierre, now his cowardly assailants, rose to denounce him: he whom they had hailed as the “Incorruptible” had become “the new Gatilina”; with St. Just and Couthon he had intended to establish a triumvirate after the manner of Sylla; one accused Robespierre of befriending
Danton, another of murdering him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000667">Meanwhile the wretched Vadier interposed perpetually with his story of Catherine Theot, the crazy old woman who called herself the mother of God, and under whose mattress a letter to Robespierre had been found addressing him as the Messiah.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000668">Amidst all this wild medley of accusations Robespierre and his allies vainly strove to obtain a hearing; once the thin voice of the
Incorruptible raised itself above the tumult in a despairing appeal: “For the last time will you let me speak, president of assassins?”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000669">But the words he would have spoken died away in his throat: “The blood of Danton chokes him!’’ cried Gamier de l’Aube.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000670">“Ah, then, it is Danton you wish to avenge?” began
Robespierre, but again his voice was drowned in angry clamour.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000671">An obscure member named Louchet called out for his arrest, and the proposal being put to the vote was unanimously adopted.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000672">Other members followed, demanding the decree to be extended to his brother, Augustin Robespierre, to St. Just, Couthon, and Lebas, and these demands again met with unanimous approval.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000673">So at half-past five, as the sitting ended, the police entered the hall and led away the five arrested deputies to the prisons assigned to them.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000674">But the Commune, which still remained faithful to
Robespierre, prevented the execution of this project; word had already been sent out by Fleuriot Lescot, the mayor of Paris, to the concierges of the different prisons forbidding them to admit the Robespierristes, who were then—again by the order of the mayor—conveyed triumphantly to the Hotel de
Ville.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000675">Meanwhile Fleuriot Lescot ordered the tocsin to be sounded, and summoned the Jacobins to the rescue of “the martyrs.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000676">But now that the moment for action had come Robespierre displayed the same fatal irresolution that had characterized the leaders of each party in turn at the moment of crisis.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000677">Like Louis XVI on the 10th of
August, the Girondins on the 2nd of June, Danton on the 5th of April, Robespierre could find no stirring words wherewith to inspire his supporters, could decide on no heroic course of action that might have rallied the hesitating multitude around him.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000678">There were no great men in the Revolution, contemporaries declare; amongst the many leaders of the people was not one Cromwell, and when we consider the end of all these men whom historians have magnified into giants, and observe the total inability of one and all to play a losing game, we are forced to the same conclusion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000679">Whilst still on the crest of the wave—whither they had been carried by circumstances rather than by personal ability—they could display vigour, audacity, resolution, but the moment the tide turned forcibly against them, they allowed themselves to be engulfed almost without a struggle.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000680">As late as seven o’clock on that evening of the 9th of
Thermidor the day was not lost for Robespierre and his adherents—Hanriot that afternoon had triumphantly escorted “a batch” of forty-two to the guillotine—nearly all obscure and humble members of the <i>petite bourgeoisie</i> or the people—ruthlessly cutting down the crowd with his sabre when for the first and last time they attempted to intervene and save the victims; and since still at the head of his troops, the Commune had reason to hope that he would repeat his success of the 31st of May by keeping the Hotel de Ville in a state of siege.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000681">But Robespierre, instead of concerting with Hanriot on the measures to be taken, left the commander to his own devices, which, on this fateful day, consisted in getting gloriously drunk and galloping about Paris shouting, “Kill the policemen!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000682">Hanriot’s wild career was brought to an abrupt conclusion in the Place de Palais Royal, where he fell from his horse and was seized by the police, who placed him under arrest.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000683">Later in the evening, Coffinhal, vice-president of the Revolutionary Tribunal, came to his rescue with 200 gunners and delivered him, but the wretched man had now completely lost his head, and instead of rallying the crowd merely succeeded in terrifying it by his maniacal aspect and behaviour.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000684">All this time the Faubourgs were waiting for orders.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000685">Accustomed throughout the Revolution to march only at the word of command, they were now quite incapable of independent action, and had no idea whether they were to support the Commune or the Convention.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000686">Sainte-Antoine at last wrote naively to the magistrates of the Commune explaining the dilemma, and if
Robespierre or any of his supporters had only gone in person to rouse the district, they could undoubtedly have mustered the men of the Faubourg around them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000687">Instead of this Robespierre could do nothing but talk, leaving the field open to his adversaries, who thereupon circulated a rumour in Saint-Marceau that he was a Royalist conspirator, for a seal with a <i>fleur de lys</i> had been found in his possession.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000688">The Faubourgs, thus left without a leader, abandoned the
Commune and went over to the Convention.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000689">Meanwhile the crowd collected on the Place de Greve outside the H6tel de Ville showed no more decision than the Faubourgs, and only awaited events in order to throw its weight into the scale on either side.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000690">Already, however, its confidence in the Commune had been shaken by the deranged behaviour of Hanriot, and to this Paris populace that always worships strength the news that Robespierre and his party had been outlawed by the Convention served finally to alienate any lingering sympathy it entertained for the defeated faction.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000691">When at midnight the storm that all day had been gathering burst over the city in a torrent of rain, the crowd, damped both in mind and body, took the opportunity to disperse, leaving the Robespierristes to their fate.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000692">It was thus that Barras, placed by the Convention in command of the troops, was able to advance through the deserted Place de Greve without encountering any resistance, and Leonard Bourdon at the head of the armed police went forward into the Hotel de Ville to re-arrest the five deputies.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000693">Then Hanriot, losing his head completely, rushed into the
Salle de Conseil where Robespierre and his party were assembled, crying out that all was lost, whereupon Coffinhal overwhelmed him with reproaches, and finally seizing him round the body hurled him out of the window into the courtyard below.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000694">There a manure heap broke his fall, and the besotted commander was able to crawl into a sewer, where he remained until the following day.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000695">Close on the heels of Hanriot, Leonard Bourdon and his policemen entered the Salle de Conseil, and at this sight the Robespierristes gave way to despair.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000696">A scene of wild confusion followed.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000697">Maximilien
Robespierre, seated at a table where he had begun to write out an order summoning the Section des Piques to his rescue, fell forward suddenly shot through the jaw—whether by his own hand or by that of the policeman Merda, who afterwards boasted of the deed, is uncertain; his brother Augustin climbed out of the window, and running along an outside ledge flung himself down on to the steps of the Hotel de Ville, where he lay, mutilated and bleeding; Couthon dragged his paralysed limbs beneath a table, whence he was dislodged and brutally flung down the staircase by the commissioners of the Convention.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000698">St. Just, according to certain contemporaries, alone remained immovable; according to others, he asked Lebas to shoot him, but Lebas responded, “Coward!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000699">I have other things to do!” and forthwith blew out his own brains.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000700">Early in the morning of the 10th of Thermidor a part of this human wreckage was gathered up and carried to the Tuileries, where the
Convention still remained sitting: first of all Maximilien Robespierre borne on a stretcher, his eyes closed, his naturally bilious countenance wearing the livid hue of death, and so apparently lifeless that the Assembly refused to admit “the corpse of the tyrant,” and the stretcher-bearers were obliged to go on to the Comité de Salut Public and deposit their burden on a table—according to Barras, the famous green-covered table around which the committee gathered nightly to draw up their lists of proscriptions.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000701">Here, then, on the very spot where he had ordained the slaughter of countless human beings, Robespierre lay himself, a piteous object now, with his head resting on a wooden box, and the blood flowing from his fractured jaw over the white frilled shirt and the pale-blue coat.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000702">For seven hours, racked with agony, the man before whom all France had trembled endured the jeers and insults of the soldiers and policemen he had believed to be devoted to his cause.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000703">At one moment a working-man approached and, looking long and closely into the shattered face of the tyrant, murmured in awe-struck tones, “Yes, there is a God!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000704">After a while St. Just, still erect and impassive, was led in with Dumas, their hands tightly bound, and later more stretchers arrived at the foot of the staircase leading to the committee room on which lay the mangled forms of Couthon and Augustin Robespierre.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000705">At ten o’clock, whilst the criers went through the streets railing out, “The Great Arrest of Catilina Robespierre and his accomplices!” the prisoners were all transferred to the Conciergerie—“the ante-chamber of death.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000706">No trial was to be accorded them, for with the downfall of each faction the revolutionary government took a further step in illegality, and, the
Robespierristes having been declared outlaws, the Convention held it necessary only to bring them before the Revolutionary Tribunal for purposes of identification, a process that occupied a bare half-hour.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000707">The whole band, to the number of twenty-two, including, besides Robespierre and his accomplices, the miserable cobbler Simon, to whom the little Dauphin had been confided, Fleuriot
Lescot, and twelve members of the Commune, were sentenced to be executed the same afternoon on the Place de la Revolution.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000708">For on this great day no fear was entertained of wounding the susceptibilities of the dwellers in the Rue
Saint-Honore and the surrounding district by the spectacle of the guillotine, and the Place de la Revolution alone could accommodate the crowds that hastened from all quarters of Paris to celebrate the death of the tyrant.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000709">When in the late afternoon the four tumbrils emerged from the courtyard of the Conciergerie, all Paris had turned out to see them pass, and to the wondering multitude the sight presented by the men who had so long held them under the sway of the Terror seemed awe-inspiring evidence of “the justice of God.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000710">So had the mighty fallen!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000711">Robespierre the all-powerful, a crushed and broken thing, the livid countenance swathed in its bloodstained bandages, the sky-blue coat torn and discoloured; Couthon lying helplessly on the straw of the tumbril trampled by the feet of his companions; Hanriot, who but yesterday had cleared the way for the forty-two poor victims, cutting down the people with his sabre, now a ghastly spectacle, with one eye falling from its socket, his face bleeding, his clothes tattered and covered with filth from the sewer whence he had been dragged.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000712">St. Just alone retained his habitual calm.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000713">The voluminous cravat was gone, leaving his neck bare for execution, but the delicate chamois-coloured coat still remained unspotted, the wide expanse of white waistcoat still fresh and uncrumpled, whilst in his buttonhole there glowed a red carnation.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000714">So with head erect St. Just, that strange enigma of the
Terror, passed to his death, a marble statue to the last.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000715">As the procession slowly made its way along the Rue
Saint-Honore it was not only joy that greeted its progress but fury—the long-pent-up fury of a crushed and suffering people.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000716">The tyrant had fallen, but could his downfall give them back their dead?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000717">Everywhere in that vast crowd were men and women who had lost their all, in whose hearts was no room for rejoicing, only for reviling.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000718">One such grief-racked creature—a woman—sprang on to the back of the cart that held Robespierre and, clinging to the bars, cried out in a voice of agony:</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000719">“Monster vomited by Hell, thy torment intoxicates me with joy!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000720">I have only one regret—that thou hast not a thousand lives so that I might enjoy the spectacle of seeing them tom from thee one by one!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000721">Go, scoundrel, go down to the tomb with the curses of all wives and of all mothers!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000722">Thus amidst the maledictions of the people, whose servile courtier he had been, Maximilien Robespierre passed to his death.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000723">Those amongst the crowd around the scaffold who desired to see him suffer—and they were many —were gratified by the horrible scene that took place on the platform of the guillotine when the executioner, roughly tearing off the bandage that bound the head of Robespierre, loosed the fractured jaw, which fell, leaving a gaping chasm, and wrung from the tortured victim a roar of agony “like that of a dying tiger which could be heard in the furthest extremities of the square.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000724">As at the death of Hébert, the brutality of the executioner delighted the spectators, and when a moment later the mutilated head was raised aloft, the vast multitude that filled the Place de la Revolution and overflowed into the Tuileries and the Champs Elysees broke into a perfect thunder of applause that rose and fell and rose again, whilst men and women fell into each other’s arms crying out, “At last we are free!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000725">The tyrant is no more!”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000726">But this time it was no sudden madness such as had seized a part of the crowd gathered around the scaffold of the King, and which had been immediately succeeded by reaction; on this 10th of Thermidor the people really did go home rejoicing with a joy that throughout the days that followed grew in intensity, transforming Paris from a place of gloom and mourning into a gala city of new-found delights.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000727">Only to be able to walk abroad at liberty, to hold one’s head up in the sunshine, to greet one’s fellow-men, to speak one’s thoughts aloud—what strange and wondrous happiness!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000728">At the street comers, in the public squares, the theatres, the cafes, long-lost friends whom terror had kept apart clasped each other’s hands, embraced with tears of joy—it was a delirium, an ecstasy of bliss!</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000729">Why had the death of Robespierre brought about this marvellous transformation?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000730">Robespierre and his allies were, as we have seen, by no means the sole authors of the Terror—nor indeed the most ferocious.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000731">Barére, Billaud, Collot, Freron, Tallien—henceforth to be known as the
Thermidoriens—still remained; Fouquier still sat making up his lists in his tower at the Conciergerie; the jackals of the Comité de Sûreté Générale still prowled at large about the city.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000732">Until the 10th of Thermidor it does not appear that one of these men had any thought of ending or even modifying the Terror.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000733">It was certainly not from any disapproval of the system they had attacked
Robespierre.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000734">For amongst all the accusations brought against him at the
Convention by the Thermidoriens, not one related even remotely to the matter of bloodshed; on the contrary, he had been reproached for not loving Marat or
Chalier, the author of the atrocities at Lyon and the object of Collot’s ardent admiration.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000735">These facts have given the panegyrists of Robespierre a further opportunity to declare that he wished to end the Terror, and that the
Thermidoriens were alone to blame for its continuance.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000736">But to suppose this is to deny Robespierre any motive in originally organising it.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000737">If, as we have seen, he had embarked on it with a purpose—a system of depopulation which was to produce a harmonious democracy—why should he wish to arrest it at this stage?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000738">The execution of 2800 people could not be said to have sensibly diminished the population of Paris, nor could the death-roll for all
France—even if it amounted to the figure of 1,025,711 given by Prudhomme—be considered as more than a step towards the reduction of the French nation to the eight millions generally advocated by the leaders.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000739">There is, therefore, every reason to suppose that by the 9th of Thermidor the Terror was really only beginning, and that if the division had not taken place on this day between the
Terrorists the hecatombs would have reached colossal proportions.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000740">With this scheme, however, the Thermidoriens were heartily in accord.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000741">How, then, did it come to pass that the downfall of the
Robespierristes resulted in the ending of the Terror?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000742">The simplest explanation seems to be that the system of the Terror gave way under the weight of public opinion.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000743">For to the people of Paris, who always identified each regime with a personality, Robespierre and the Terror were synonymous, and consequently to their minds the end of Robespierre meant the end of the Terror—hence their outburst of rejoicing.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000744">The Thermidoriens realizing this, and finding themselves greeted on the morning of the 10th of Thermidor by a rapturous crowd as the deliverers of France, were quick to see that their best chance of popularity lay in accepting the role assigned to them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000745">If the people thought that in overthrowing Robespierre they had intended to overthrow the system of the
Terror, well, they would stop the Terror and shift all the blame for the past from their own shoulders by making Robespierre the scapegoat of the whole
Terrorist party.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000746">For the purpose that had inspired the Robespierristes to reduce the population these Opportunists cared nothing, and they were ready to fall in with any regime provided only they themselves could cling to place and power.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000747">The Thermidorien reaction was thus not the work of a political party, but a really popular movement brought about by the force of the people’s will, which, for the first time since the beginning of the
Revolution, triumphed over the designs of the demagogues.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000748">Although the 9th of Thermidor had removed only a portion of the Terrorists, the growing force of public opinion rendered the downfall of the remainder inevitable.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000749">On the 27th of November, Carrier, the “depopulator of
Nantes,” was summoned before the Revolutionary Tribunal, where he protested his innocence and declared that he had acted only from motives of the purest patriotism.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000750">A more plausible line of defence consisted in his plea that his methods had received the approval both of the Comité de Salut Public and of the
Convention, and that no reproaches had been addressed to him until after the
Terror had ended.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000751">The apologists of Robespierre have attempted to prove that
Carrier was recalled from Nantes on account of the atrocities he committed there; the truth is that he incurred the displeasure of the Incorruptible, not by his fearful cruelty towards the people, but by his corrupt and vicious manner of life, and also by his threatening attitude towards Robespierre’s protégé, young Jullien, who, terrified for his own safety, wrote to the Comité de Salut
Public to complain.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000752">Moreover, in the letter from the Comité summoning him back to Paris not the faintest disapproval was expressed, and Carrier was merely informed—amidst assurances of fraternal good-will—that his arduous labours had entitled him to a little rest and that another mission would be given him.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000753">It was, therefore, in no way a chastened or repentant Carrier who returned to
Paris on February 16, I793—that is to say, more than three months after he had inaugurated the noyades.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000754">On his arrival he received the compliments of the
Jacobin Club, and met with not a word of remonstrance from the Convention, where he resumed his place as a respected member and of which he was elected secretary three months later.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000755">But to the people Carrier, like Robespierre, embodied the system of the Terror, and he was condemned to death amidst universal applause.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000756">On the 16th of December 1794 an immense crowd once more assembled to watch the passage of the cart containing Carrier and two of his accomplices—Grandmaison, a member of the revolutionary committee of Nantes, convicted of having sabred the drowning victims of the noyades as they struggled in the water, and Pinard, leader of the negro legion that had outraged and murdered women and children.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000757">If the people had expected a wild-beast show they were not disappointed, for although Carrier, fortified by the conviction that he was a martyr dying for his country, faced his end with serenity, and Grandmaison only sobbed with helpless rage, Pinard presented a terrifying spectacle as, with flaming eyes and foaming bps, he spat upon the crowd, or when the jolts of the tumbril threw him against Carrier attempted to tear him with his teeth, overwhelming him with invectives for the fate he had brought on them all.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000758">It is said that as Carrier lay strapped to the plank of the guillotine a clarionet struck up the air of the “Ca ira!” and at this last insult the wretched man raised his head and darted a look of fury at the jeering multitude.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000759">The musician continued to play gaily until the blade had fallen.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000760">On the 1st of May 1795 the Public Prosecutor of Paris followed the same road to the Place de Greve.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000761">Fouquier too protested his innocence: “I acted only in accordance with the laws passed by an all-powerful
Convention.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000762">If he, the instrument, was brought to justice, should not the authors of the system, the remaining members of the revolutionary committees, be summoned before the Tribunal?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000763">True, and the subsequent condemnation of
Collot, Billaud, and Barére to mere transportation for life was only one more miscarriage of justice in the history of the iniquitous tribunal.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000764">The spirit that animated the multitude around the tumbrils which bore Fouquier and his accomplices to the scaffold was less one of
“ferocious joy,” says a police report, than of “curiosity to see extraordinary monsters”; the truth is, perhaps, that Paris was now too hungry to rejoice uproariously at anything.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000765">But when the carts approached the Place de Greve there burst forth shouts of fury: “Go and join your victims, scoundrel!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000766">“Give me back my brother, my friend, my father, my wife, my mother, my children!”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000767">As at the execution of Robespierre, a woman, half demented with grief, clung to the bars of the tumbril cursing the murderer of her husband.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000768">Fouquier, looking forth with bloodshot eyes at the starving people, returned insult for insult, jeered at their misery in incoherent words of which the following only were distinguishable: “Vile rabble, go and look for bread!</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000769">(<i>Vile canaille, va chercher du pain!</i>).”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000770">Fouquier, reserved to the end as the <i>piece de resistance</i> of the day, heard the blade descend fifteen times whilst in an agony of terror he waited his turn at the foot of the scaffold.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000771">As each head was held up to the wondering gaze of the multitude a mighty sigh of relief rose from amongst them like the moan of a troubled sea, but when that last frightful trophy was raised aloft the people, struck with horror as at a Gorgon’s head, were frozen to silence.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h2><span class="fragm" id="f000772">RESULTS OF THE TERROR</span> </h2>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000773">The Terror, then, had ended, and what had it done for the people?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000774">It is to Carrier that we owe the famous phrase, “France was saved by the Terror,” a phrase eagerly adopted by revolutionary historians, and that by force of repetition has almost come to be believed.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000775">But from what was France saved by the Terror?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000776">From hunger?</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000777">From misery?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000778">From oppression?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000779">Alas, no, all these evils, which, as we have seen, flourished more luxuriantly during the Terror than ever before it, increased steadily after it had ended.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000780">Throughout the lean years that followed
Paris was reduced to the lowest pitch of wretchedness; people fainted in the streets for want of food, or in desperation threw themselves into the' Seine; women, maddened at the sight of their starving children, cried out for death to end their sufferings; and when at last bands of women invaded the Convention as they had once invaded Versailles clamouring for bread, they were met this time with no tears of compassion, but were driven out with whips.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000781">What wonder, then, that the people “incessantly compared their condition with that of 1788,” that the women said to each other in the streets: “We need a good father of a family to feed us as we had before; how can we love the Republic that makes us die of hunger?”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000782">Not only did the people suffer from official mismanagement and indifference, but from the lack of all private effort to relieve distress—benevolence had vanished with the Old Regime.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000783">“Every day offers the proof of a sad truth,” says the <i>Republicain Franfais</i>, “which is that the
<i>parvenus</i>, the new rich, have harder hearts than those born in affluence.</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000784">The latter used to share their superfluity with the poor, and nothing was commoner in this town than to see delicately bred women carrying soup, money, and consolations into garrets and prisons.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000785">To-day one dies of hunger and grief amidst these new millionaires enriched by our spoils; one dies without experiencing a single moment of pity.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000786">It will be urged that it was from external danger that the
Terror saved France; that if the people suffered the State prospered, the defences of the country had been made secure.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000787">To judge of the truth of this statement let us refer to the description of the condition of France at the end of the Terror, given by one of the revolutionaries themselves—Larevelliere
Lepeaux, a member of the Directory:</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000788">“The National Treasury was entirely empty; not a <i>sou</i> remained.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000789"><i>Assignats</i> were without value . . . public revenues were nil, no plan of finance existed. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000790">Enfuriated stockjobbing had taken the place of loyal and productive commerce; it corrupted all classes of society . . . there was not a sack of com in the granaries nor even a single grain of wheat. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000791">Hospitals were without revenues, without resources or administration; public relief of every kind was reduced almost to nothing.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000792">The canals were ruined, many bridges broken down, the roads impassable . . . communications of all kinds had become extremely difficult. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000793">Public instruction, so to speak, no longer existed. . . .</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000794">The insolent cynicism of the leaders of anarchy had created oblivion to all decency . . . what was the state of the army?</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000795">Disorganization was complete . . . in a word, the army, whether in the interior or on the frontiers, was without discipline, without provisions, without pay, without clothing, without equipment.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000796">As a climax of misfortune these beaten and discouraged armies had lost all the fruit of their successes beyond the Rhine. ...</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000797">As to the navy . . . our fleets were humiliated, beaten, blockaded in our ports, tormented by insubordination . . . ruined by desertion.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000798">Such, then, was the state to which France was reduced by the Terror.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000799">Can we doubt that if it had continued she must eventually have fallen a prey to a stronger power?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000800">And what prevented this?</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000801">One thing only—the advent of the strong man for whom during ten long years she had waited in vain; the man who put down with an iron hand the tyranny and corruption of the
Directory and rallied the French around the standard of the Empire.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000802">The truth is then that France was saved from dismemberment, not by the Terror, but by <i>Imperialism</i>, whilst she was saved from internal ruin and disruption, <i>in spite of the
Terror</i>, by the indomitable spirit of her <i>people</i>.</span> </p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<h2><span class="fragm" id="f000803">THE COURSE OF THE INTRIGUES</span> </h2>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000804">Whilst France was brought to the verge of ruin, and her people were dying of starvation, the great intrigues continued their course with unabated ardour.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000805">Orléanisme, though momentarily checked by the execution of Philippe Égalité and the banishment of his sons, was to see its efforts rewarded thirty-six years later; Prussia, rid of the most formidable obstacle to her power—the Franco-Austrian alliance—could afford to bide her time in spite of military defeats in order to realize her dreams of European domination; Anarchy, which had already triumphed under Marat and the
Hébertistes, had become a force that has never since ceased to threaten the peace of the world.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000806">These consequences must be dealt with more fully in a concluding chapter amongst the results of the Revolution as a whole.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000807">Alone of the four great intrigues, that of the English
Jacobins received a serious check in the Reign of Terror.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000808">This was, however, not owing to any modification in the sentiments of our revolutionaries; the frightful period of bloodshed and horror that had overtaken France served merely to stimulate their ardour for revolutionary doctrines, and right up to the 9th of Thermidor they never relaxed their efforts to bring about the same order of things in our own country.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000809">True, the outbreak of war between England and France, followed by Pitt’s timely introduction of the Traitorous
Correspondence Act, considerably hampered their relations with the French
Jacobins, and open addresses of congratulation were rendered impossible; nevertheless the intrigue between the Subversives in both countries was still clandestinely carried on, and mutual support was given throughout the Terror:
Danton, by means of his connections in London, actively co-operated in the attempt to overthrow the British monarchy; Fox assured the Comité de Salut
Public of his sympathy and approval, and later publicly applauded British reverses; whilst Lord Stanhope continued to maintain an affectionate correspondence with Barére, the archenemy of his country, and to applaud the atrocities committed in France.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000810">This last flagrant betrayal of the interests not only of the English people but of the human race roused even the indignation of men who had formerly sympathized with the Revolution, and in April 1794 we find William Miles, once a member of the Jacobin Club in Paris, writing these words of remonstrance to Lord Stanhope:</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000811">“In the name of Heaven, my Lord, what frenzy is this that stimulates you to qualify as improvement what has proved fatal to millions?</span>
<span class="fragm" id="f000812">Whichever way you direct your attention you find affluence and content, freedom and happiness.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000813">In France every tree is a gibbet and every other man you meet a hangman.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000814">Yet your Lordship stands forth avowedly an admirer of crimes which desolate the earth and dishonour humanity.”</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000815">But the people of England expressed their disapproval in a more emphatic manner, and on the night of the 10th to the nth of June, whilst London was celebrating Lord Howe’s victory over the French, the crowd, enraged by Lord
Stanhope’s revolutionary sentiments, set fire to his house, and the unhappy peer was obliged to escape for his life over the roofs.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000816">The same thing had happened three years earlier at Birmingham, when the so-called Constitutional
Society of that town, headed by Dr. Priestley, had issued “inflammatory handbills of Republican tendency.”</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000817">When on the 14th of July the Society met at a dinner to celebrate the fall of the Bastille, an angry crowd assembled and burnt down both the meeting-houses of the sect; Dr. Priestley’s house was attacked and he himself had to fly from door to door for refuge.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000818">The riots went on for three days, and the magistrates were powerless to interfere.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000819">It is, therefore, as much of an error to imagine that the failure to produce revolution in
England was owing to the uninflammable character of the English as it is to attribute its success in France to the inflammable character of the French.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000820">It was precisely because the great majority of the French people were <i>un</i>inflammable, because they passively submitted to the domination of a handful of demagogues, that the Revolution was able to assume such frightful proportions.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000821">And it was because the English people beneath their apparent calm were in reality highly inflammable, were ready to oppose an active and even violent resistance to subversive doctrines, that the revolutionary movement could make no headway amongst them.</span> <span class="fragm" id="f000822">Nor was this the result of servile submission to the existing order of things; the people of England were well aware that great and drastic reforms were needed, but because they understood the meaning of true liberty it was not to Jacobinism that they looked for salvation.</span> </p>

<p><span class="fragm" id="f000823">Thus England at this supreme crisis in her history was saved from anarchy and ruin, not only by the statesmanship of Pitt and the eloquence of Burke, but <i>by the sound common sense of the British people</i>.</span></p>

<hr style="visibility: hidden; margin: 0; border-width: 0; padding: 0" />

</div>



</body>

</html>
